

AD&D FORGOTTEN REALMS VOL. I: POOL OF RADIANCE
Exhaustive Game Information
Version 2.00 - April 2, 2026

by Stephen S. Lee (ssjlee9@gmail.com)
This is written for PC version 1.3, but it should still be mostly accurate for
  other computer versions and platforms, except for the NES version.
Please feel free to e-mail me with corrections or suggestions.
This FAQ is licensed under CC BY-NC 4.0.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
-----------------

You may jump to the appropriate section by searching for "SECTION " + section
numbers.

0 - Ten Most Frequently Asked Questions
1 - Introduction
1.1 - About This FAQ
1.2 - Where To Get The Game
2 - Technical Detail On Running The Game
2.1 - Recommended Emulators
2.2 - Installing the Game
2.3 - Game Setup
2.4 - Getting Rid of the Copy Protection
2.5 - Using Gold Box Companion
2.6 - Game Interface Basics
2.7 - Restarting the Game
2.8 - Transferring Characters
2.8.1 - Transferring Characters to Curse of the Azure Bonds
2.8.2 - Transferring Characters to Hillsfar
3 - Party
3.1 - What You Should Know Before Creating Your Party
3.2 - Party for This Game Only
3.3 - Party for All Four Games
3.4 - Party for Hackers
4 - Character Development
4.1 - Equipment
4.1.1 - Initial Equipment
4.1.2 - Upgrading Equipment
4.2 - NPCs
4.3 - Training Your Characters
4.4 - Magic-User Spells to Learn
5 - Combat Strategy and Tactics
5.1 - General Nonmagical Tactics
5.2 - Magical Spell Strategy
5.3 - Other Magical Tactics
5.4 - Tips for Specific Enemies
6 - Maps
6.1 - Maps Introduction
6.2.1 - Civilized Area (New Phlan) Overview
6.2.2 - Civilized Area (New Phlan) Details
6.3.1 - Slums Overview
6.3.2 - Slums Details
6.4.1 - Sokal Keep Overview
6.4.2 - Sokal Keep Details
6.5.1 - Kuto's Well Overview
6.5.2 - Kuto's Well Details
6.6.1 - Kuto's Well Catacombs Overview
6.6.2 - Kuto's Well Catacombs Details
6.7.1 - Mendor's Library Overview
6.7.2 - Mendor's Library Details
6.8.1 - Podal Plaza Overview
6.8.2 - Podal Plaza Details
6.9.1 - Cadorna Textile House Overview
6.9.2 - Cadorna Textile House Details
6.10.1 - Kovel Mansion Overview
6.10.2 - Kovel Mansion Details
6.11.1 - Wealthy Area Overview
6.11.2 - Wealthy Area Details
6.12.1 - Temple of Bane Overview
6.12.2 - Temple of Bane Details
6.13.1 - Wilderness Overview
6.13.2 - Wilderness Details
6.14.1 - Wilderness Lairs Overview
6.14.2 - Wilderness Lairs Details
6.15.1 - Nomad Camp Overview
6.15.2 - Nomad Camp Details
6.16.1 - Kobold Caves Overview
6.16.2 - Kobold Caves Details
6.17.1 - Yarash's Pyramid Overview
6.17.2 - Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 Details
6.17.3 - Yarash's Pyramid Levels 2 and 3 Details
6.18.1 - Lizardman Keep Overview
6.18.2 - Lizardman Keep Details
6.19.1 - Buccaneer Base Overview
6.19.2 - Buccaneer Base Details
6.20.1 - Zhentil Keep Outpost Overview
6.20.2 - Zhentil Keep Outpost Details
6.21.1 - Valhingen Graveyard Overview
6.21.2 - Valhingen Graveyard Details
6.22.1 - Stojanow Gate Overview
6.22.2 - Stojanow Gate Details
6.23.1 - Valjevo Castle Overview
6.23.2 - Valjevo Castle Details
6.24.1 - Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze Overview
6.24.2 - Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze Details
6.25.1 - Valjevo Castle Inner Tower Details Overview
6.25.2 - Valjevo Castle Inner Tower Details
7 - Game Mechanics
7.1 - Mechanics Introduction
7.2 - Hit Points and Status Conditions
7.3 - Time
7.4 - Experience and Gaining Levels
7.5 - Statistics
7.5.1 - Statistic: Strength
7.5.2 - Statistic: Intelligence
7.5.3 - Statistic: Wisdom
7.5.4 - Statistic: Dexterity
7.5.5 - Statistic: Constitution
7.5.6 - Statistic: Charisma
7.6 - Races
7.6.1 - Race: Human
7.6.2 - Race: Dwarf
7.6.3 - Race: Elf
7.6.4 - Race: Gnome
7.6.5 - Race: Half-Elf
7.6.6 - Race: Halfling
7.7 - Classes
7.7.1 - Class: Cleric
7.7.2 - Class: Fighter
7.7.3 - Class: Magic-User
7.7.4 - Class: Thief
7.8 - Physical Combat
7.8.1 - Calculating THAC0
7.8.2 - Calculating Armor Class
7.8.3 - Calculating Chance To Hit
7.8.4 - Calculating Damage
7.9 - Other Ways of Resisting Attacks
7.9.1 - Resisting Magical Attacks
7.9.2 - Magic Resistance
7.9.3 - The Saving Throw
7.10 - Encumbrance and Movement
7.11 - Battle Order
7.11.1 - Combat Arena
7.11.2 - Surprise
7.11.3 - Initiative
7.12 - Turning Undead
7.13 - Morale
7.14 - Party Strength
8 - Magic Spellbooks
8.1 - Notes on Spells
8.2 - Cleric Spellbook
8.2.1 - 1st Level Cleric Spells
8.2.2 - 2nd Level Cleric Spells
8.2.3 - 3rd Level Cleric Spells
8.2.4 - 7th Level Cleric Spells
8.3 - Magic-user Spellbook
8.3.1 - 1st Level Magic-user Spells
8.3.2 - 2nd Level Magic-user Spells
8.3.3 - 3rd Level Magic-user Spells
8.4 - Spell Summary
8.5 - Temple Spells
9 - Items
9.1 - Item Basic Mechanics
9.2.1 - Basic Weapons
9.2.2 - Basic Armor
9.2.3 - Other Items
9.3 - Magic Items
9.4 - Random Magic Items
9.5 - Summary of Locations with Magic Items
10 - Creature Statistics
10.1 - Notes on Creature Statistics
10.2 - Detailed Bestiary
11 - Interface and Bug Abuse
11.1 - Cheat Mode
11.2 - Raising the Dead with Targeted Damage Spells
11.3 - Duplicating Items
11.4 - Abusing Abnormal Constitution
12 - Technical Analysis
12.1 - Overview
12.1.1 - Useful Hacking Utilities and References
12.1.2 - Program Overview
12.1.3 - File Manifest
12.2 - Data Structures
12.2.1 - DAX File Format
12.2.2 - Creature Formats
12.2.2.1 - Creature Format
12.2.2.2 - Statistics Minima and Maxima Table Format
12.2.2.3 - Experience and Spells Table Format
12.2.3 - Effect Format
12.2.4 - Item Formats
12.2.4.1 - Item Format
12.2.4.2 - Base Item Format
12.2.4.3 - Random Item Array Format
12.2.5 - Map Formats
12.2.5.1 - 3D Map Format
12.2.5.2 - Wilderness Map Special Location Format
12.2.6 - Combat Formats
12.2.6.1 - Combat Information Format
12.2.6.2 - Combat Arena Format
12.2.6.3 - Combat Arena Location Format
12.2.6.4 - Combat Target Data Format
12.2.6.5 - Combat Unknown 1 Format
12.2.6.6 - Combat Unknown 2 Format
12.2.6.7 - Combat Downed Character Format
12.2.6.8 - Stinking Cloud Format
12.2.7 - Spell Format
12.2.8 - String Linked List Member Format
12.2.9 - Image Formats
12.2.9.1 - Image Buffer Format
12.2.9.2 - Animation Data Format
12.2.10 - Copy Protection Format
12.3 - Script File Format
12.3.1 - Script Overview
12.3.2 - Script Variable Types
12.3.3 - Script Opcodes
12.4 - Script Address Locations
12.4.1 - Script Flag List
12.4.2 - Other Script Addresses
12.5 - Save File Format
12.6 - Code Overview
12.6.1 - Executable Overview
12.6.2 - Executable Code
12.6.3 - Overlay Code
12.6.4 - Data Segment
12.6.5 - Code Hacking
13 - Bug List
13.1 - Technical Bugs
13.2 - Scripting Bugs
13.3 - Adaptational Bugs
13.4 - Strange Programming Decisions
14 - Fluff
14.1 - Journal Entries
14.2 - Novelization
14.3 - Historical Accuracy
14.4 - Miscellaneous Criticism
15 - Appendix
15.1 - References
15.2 - FAQ Version History
15.3 - Acknowledgments
15.4 - What I Want
15.5 - Legal Notice


SECTION 0 - Ten Most Frequently Asked Questions
-----------------------------------------------

These are quick questions with quick answers; more detail is elsewhere in this
FAQ.

1. Why should I play this game?

Pool of Radiance is a tactically challenging old-school RPG with a reasonably
faithful adaptation of 1st Edition AD&D rules.  It was popular in its day,
still well-remembered, inspired many other CRPGs, and has aged reasonably well
for such an old game.  You can also transfer your characters to later games in
the series.

2. Where do I get the game today?

The simplest, legal way to get this game is through http://www.gog.com/.  You
want Forgotten Realms: The Archives Collection Two.  This will get you seven
other old-school AD&D CRPGs with it.

3. How do I run the game on a modern computer?

The simplest way is to use DOSBox, which runs on a wide variety of platforms,
and which the GOG version includes for you.  Either the main branch, or one of
the alternative forks like the DOSBox-X branch (which has save states, and is
what I recommend for more advanced users), will work just fine.

4. I'm getting the error "Insert disk 3 in drive c:".

Versions 1.0 to 1.2 are picky about where they are installed; the usual version
on abandonware sites is v1.0.  These cannot be installed in a directory more
than one level deep from C:\ (so C:\GAMES\POOL\ will never work).  POOL.CFG
must also be edited (with any text editor) to point to the correct directories,
with DOS/Windows line termination and a backslash at the end of the directory
name.

5. This user interface isn't very friendly; is there a tool that will help out?

The sound in this game is primitive (even compared to Curse of the Azure Bonds)
and slows down moving around, more than in any later Gold Box game.  You may
want to turn it off.

The keyboard interface has a steep learning curve at the outset, but isn't hard
to get used to.

If you're emulating the game in DOSBox under Windows, you can download Gold Box
Companion from http://gbc.zorbus.net/ to provide a variety of modern interface
enhancements.

6. What party should I start out with?

Regardless of whether or not you plan to transfer your characters to later
games, my recommended party, assuming you are not hacking the game, is:

  3 Male Elf Lawful Good Fighter/Magic-Users
  1 Male Half-Elf Lawful Good Cleric/Fighter/Magic-User
  1 Female Human Cleric
  1 Male Elf Fighter/Magic-User/Thief

You should "M"odify your stats to the maxima before starting if you intend to
transfer your characters to later games in the series, which increasingly
assume very high statistics.  If you aren't doing this, the most important
statistic is Dexterity.

7. Combat in this game is difficult; what are some tactical pointers?

  * If you want to avoid random combats in the first place by parleying, an
    "A"busive attitude generally works best.
  * Keep your party together so no one gets surrounded.  This is a bad idea
    against enemies with area attacks, but that is rare in this game.
  * Anchor your flanks with either terrain features or your best fighters, so
    monsters don't outflank your party.
  * Avoid being encumbered; the extra movement is helpful.
  * Archery is good enough to be worth the trouble of maintaining a supply of
    arrows.  You should eventually equip fighters with fine composite long
    bows.
  * If confronted with spellcasting enemies, inflicting even 1 point of damage
    is enough to prevent an enemy from casting a spell that round.
  * Use the best spells listed below.
  * Many of the best spells render enemies helpless; you can automatically kill
    such helpless enemies in one physical attack at your leisure.

8. Which spells are most effective in combat?

  * Sleep is king early in the game, and can render up to 9 enemies helpless.
  * Stinking Cloud has a short range and isn't guaranteed to work, but it is
    effective even against many powerful monsters.
  * Fireball is great at clearing out large numbers of enemies.
  * Cure Light Wounds may not seem like much, but it's the only cure spell you
    can cast in this game.
  * Protection from Evil gives you significant protection from evil monsters
    (most monsters are evil).
  * Hold Person cast by clerics can paralyze up to 3 humanoid enemies.
  * Prayer is a strong general-purpose buff/debuff spell.

9. How do I defeat the ogres and trolls in the slums?

Cast Bless before engaging.  The Sleep spell can prevent an ogre from attacking
you while it lasts; cast it on the two ogres.  Leave the sleeping body of the
ogre on the right alone, to block the path of the three trolls in the back.
Focus fire on the troll in the front to take it down, then stand on its body so
it cannot revive.  Take out the other three trolls from a distance with
archery, killing them at around the same time, then finish off the ogres.

10. How do I progress in Sokal Keep?

The dead elf near the beginning has a parchment with the keywords 'LUX',
'SAMOSUD', and 'SHESTNI'.  These can be used in parley with the undead to keep
them off your back, and to finish the mission.  If you get into combat with
undead, turning undead doesn't actually work well unless you have a level 6
cleric, or are desperate.  For the large orc/hobgoblin attack, enter the room
where the attack occurs using the southeastern door, back up your characters to
where a 3-square choke point is, and form a defensive line behind that.  You
may also want to hire NPCs in New Phlan just for this combat.


SECTION 1.1 - About This Document
---------------------------------

This document is meant to provide, in one place, exhaustive detail about the
original 1988 Pool of Radiance, the first computer RPG adaptation of 1st
Edition Advanced Dungeons and Dragons.  This is not to be confused with the
later, poorly-received Pool of Radiance: Ruins of Myth Drannor.

This document assumes you are playing IBM version 1.3 (v1.3), which the GOG
release also uses.  All known differences between that and v1.2 are technical;
there were some game script changes between v1.1 and v1.2.  There aren't even
all that many known differences between the IBM version and other platforms.
The NES version is the exception, as changes were made to fit the game on a
smaller cartridge and take advantage of the NES's superior sound capacity, and
is also significantly easier (true of many console adaptations of computer
games), though it still follows the same overall design.  The tabletop
adventure is even more different, if it even counts.

The later games in the series are, in order: Curse of the Azure Bonds, Secret
of the Silver Blades, and Pools of Darkness.  You can also transfer a character
to and from Hillsfar, which is an action RPG.

While this document *can* be used as a walkthrough, it is primarily intended to
provide complete game details for either hardcore RPG fans, or those who have
already completed the game at least once.  I don't make much effort to either
avoid spoilers or keep things brief.  If you are a more casual fan, the best
gameplay sections to read are the ones on party creation, character
development, and combat tactics.  You may also want to use the section on
detailed game mechanics in sections 7 to 10 as a reference.

The most recent version of this document should be uploaded first to GameFAQs.
(If it ever becomes unsuitable, I'll have to improvise.)

The fastest way to contact me is via e-mail; I do not check anything else
regularly.

SECTION 1.2 - Where To Get The Game
-----------------------------------

This only covers legal ways to get the game.  If you want not-so-legal ways,
your favorite search engine can help, though copies I've seen by that means
are typically v1.0.

The easiest way to get a legal copy of the game is through http://www.gog.com/
and look for Forgotten Realms: The Archives Collection Two.  It will run on any
of Windows, macOS, or Linux using a built-in copy of DOSBox, and also includes
Curse of the Azure Bonds (game 2), Hillsfar, Secret of the Silver Blades (game
3), Pools of Darkness (game 4), Gateway to the Savage Frontier (game 1 of a
second series), Treasure of the Savage Frontier (game 2), and Forgotten Realms
Unlimited Adventures.  It also includes all the available cluebooks for those
games.  It is *not* a complete set of all the D&D Gold Box games, because the
three Krynn games are not included.

If you specifically want a physical copy (probably because you like to collect
physical copies of games like me), the best way is through eBay.  It is no
longer easy to find the original floppy disk of the game for $5-$10, but it's
still easier to find than complete copies of most other vintage DOS RPGs of its
era.  A complete copy of the original IBM version should have:

  1. Gold two-piece box (about 5.75" wide x 8.75" tall x 1.25" deep).
  2. 3 5.25" low-density floppy disks.  3.5" disks were rare in those days,
     but you might occasionally see a copy with 2 3.5" low-density floppies.
     This will have a version up to 1.2 on them.  (I haven't seen a floppy
     copy with version 1.3.)  The disks are the least valuable part of the
     package, as they're the component most likely to have survived.
  3. Rule book (27 pages).
  4. Adventurer's Journal (38 pages).  Note that the rules here and in the rule
     books aren't as complete, or even as accurate, as those found in later
     Gold Box games.
  5. Code wheel.
  6. Reference card (this is platform-specific).

Many used copies come with the clue book; this is not part of any floppy disk
version of the game.  An original copy should also include advertisements for
other SSI games, though most collectors won't care much for those (as this
isn't an Infocom or Ultima game).

An unopened, still-shrinkwrapped copy of the original IBM PC release is now
worth more than it did at the time of original release.  You MIGHT even be able
to sell it for enough to account for four decades of inflation and opportunity
cost!

Other physical versions of the game include:
* AD&D Limited Edition Collector's Set -- Unlike many things labeled as limited
  or collector's editions, this is actually genuinely difficult to find.  It
  has floppy versions of Pool of Radiance (v1.2), Curse of the Azure Bonds,
  Hillsfar, Heroes of the Lance, Dragons of Flame, and War of the Lance; a
  120-page manual; 3 maps; 3 code wheels; a Dragonlance card sheet; and a
  certificate of authenticity; all in an extra-large box.

  This and the original version of Pool of Radiance are the only versions of
  the game with significant value to collectors.

* AD&D Forgotten Realms 3-Game edition - This WizardWorks release has floppy
  versions of Pool of Radiance, Curse of the Azure Bonds, and Secret of the
  Silver Blades.  (WizardWorks was a company that, like Slash, re-printed
  classic computer games.)

* AD&D 9-Game Collector's Edition - This WizardWorks release is a CD
  compilation of all nine AD&D Gold Box games.

* AD&D Forgotten Realms Archives Silver Edition -- This is a CD compilation of
  many of the DOS AD&D games.  It doesn't include the Krynn Gold Box games, but
  does include the Eye of the Beholder trilogy.  At the same time, other
  smaller collections with subsets of these games were also released.

* AD&D The Forgotten Realms Archives -- This is a later version of the
  Forgotten Realms Archives Silver Edition.

There are also two modern remakes to be aware of:

1. The fan-made version reworked for Unlimited Adventures (FRUA)
   If you have and are familiar with FRUA, you may download it here:

   http://frua.rosedragon.org/pc/modules/g/game39.zip

   For instructions on how to get started with FRUA, search the Web for "FRUA
   with essential links" and read the original post.

2. The DFortae mod
   Linked from this Discord channel:
   https://discord.com/invite/yJXvw6M

   The DFortae mod has significant number of bug fixes and additions.

   I won't go into detail here, because DFortae can and does update his mod all
   the time, and the analysis I do is difficult with a moving target.


SECTION 2.1 - Recommended Emulators
-----------------------------------

The standard emulator for playing Pool of Radiance today, and the one that
comes with the GOG version, is DOSBox (http://www.dosbox.com/).  The latest
main branch release is version 0.74-3, which is about seven years old as of
this writing.

There are other branches of DOSBox.   The primary one that I recommend is
DOSBox-X (https://dosbox-x.com/).  This includes many extensions to DOSBox; the
most important features it adds for vintage gaming fans are Roland support (not
relevant for this game) and save states (relevant for any game).  (I no longer
recommend SVN-Daum.)  DOSBox-X is somewhat more difficult for a new user to
use, but stops a lot of the problems that plague emulation.

If you want to accurately emulate the original IBM PC, the standard emulator
is PCE/ibmpc (http://www.hampa.ch/pce/pce-ibmpc.html).  This will emulate the
original IBM 5150 very accurately, down to how slow it is, including emulated
floppy access.  This emulator is more useful for games relying on the
idiosyncrasies of the IBM 5150, and it's far harder to use than DOSBox, so I
don't recommend it for Pool of Radiance.  Pool of Radiance does in fact work on
an IBM 5150, but was glacially slow even by 1988 standards.

SECTION 2.2 - Installing the Game
---------------------------------

The GOG or other ready-to-play versions of the game should take care of this
for you.

If you have a compressed archive of the game, I recommend creating a directory
specifically for DOS games, and placing Pool of Radiance in a subdirectory
there.  Use this command to mount your directory (change directory as
appropriate; this assumes you installed Pool of Radiance to something like
C:\Emulation\DOS\GAMES\POOL\):

  mount c C:\Emulation\DOS\

This command is best placed in the [autoexec] section of dosbox.conf.

If you have a CD or floppy disks, and a computer that has the appropriate
drives, you can mount them in DOSBox with these commands (change drive letters
as appropriate):

  mount a A:\ -t floppy
  mount d D:\ -t cdrom

and then you can install the game from the drive normally in DOSBox.

If you do not have v1.3 (as far as I know, you have v1.3 if and only if your
version is not a floppy version), you will have to install the game no lower
than one level below the DOS root directory.

The game version is listed on the credits screen, below the line that says
"Game Created By: SSI Special Projects".  It is not on the main menu as in all
other Gold Box games.  If no version is listed at all, you are running v1.0.

SECTION 2.3 - Game Setup
------------------------

If you move the game to any directory other than the default directory, you
must edit POOL.CFG; even v1.3 will not do this properly for you.  Change the
third line to the appropriate directory; you must include the drive letter at
the beginning and a backslash at the end to guarantee proper function.  Even
then, in versions older than v1.3 this will not work if the game directory is
two or more levels below the DOS root directory.

The fourth line of POOL.CFG points to saved games.  If you want to move saved
game files to and from this directory, they are CHRDAT?#.* and SAVGAM?.DAT,
where ? is the letter (A-J) of the saved game and # is the character number.

Other POOL.CFG lines (these are all case-sensitive):
* Line 1: graphics type
  "C" for CGA, "E" for EGA, "T" for Tandy
* Line 2: sound
  "P" for PC speaker, "T" for Tandy, "S" for silence
* Line 5: full introduction
  "F" for full (3 screens), "N" for not full (1 screen)

There is not much reason to use CGA aside from nostalgia.  Tandy graphics are
noticeably faster than EGA if you are tweaking speed (they should be visually
the same), though a modern computer is so fast that it shouldn't matter too
much, and you specifcally have to set "MACHINE=Tandy" for it to work, which is
a headache if you emulate other games.

There is no music and no AdLib/SoundBlaster/Roland support.  The PC speaker
will noticeably slow down movement; you can use "T"andy sound to avoid this,
though it sounds worse than the PC speaker to me (even though it shouldn't).
You may want to choose "S"ilence for this reason.

In all later Gold Box games, you can simply delete the *.CFG file if you want
to reconfigure the game, but this doesn't work properly in any version of Pool
of Radiance.  It will work in v1.3 if you then manually edit POOL.CFG to
include drive letters and terminating backslashes in lines 3 and 4.

Failure to set up the game properly may result in "Insert disk 3 in drive c:"
errors and a crash.

If you use a text editor outside DOS/Windows, you should use that style of
line terminator (Ctrl-M Ctrl-J).  Ctrl-M alone (most 8-bit platforms, plus
classic MacOS) may work fine, but Ctrl-J alone (Amiga, Unix and modern MacOS)
causes problems.

A saved character will have one to three files:
  1. *.SAV (in a saved game) or *.CHA (outside of a party) (always exists)
  2. *.SPC for effects (does not always exist)
  3. *.ITM for inventory (does not always exist)

SECTION 2.4 - Getting Rid of the Copy Protection
------------------------------------------------

Isn't the code wheel copy protection scheme obnoxious?  If you are playing
the GOG version, you don't have to worry about this; you can enter anything you
want at the prompt.

For instructions on how to remove the copy protection otherwise, see the Code
Hacking section.

You can also bypass the copy protection using cheat mode, though that turns
on a number of other cheats as well, which you may not want.

SECTION 2.5 - Using Gold Box Companion
--------------------------------------

Gold Box Companion is both the most useful tool for actually playing the Gold
Box games, and a useful factual reference.  The latest version as of this
writing is v2.65.  Its homepage is: http://gbc.zorbus.net/

You must specifically tell Gold Box Companion the title of the DOSBox window
running the game; if you are running a different branch you must enter its
title (e.g., "DOSBox-X").  You must also tell it which specific game you are
playing.

Valuable features it adds are the enhanced automap, the automated lookup of
things like journal entries, the ability to show statistics that the game does
not normally show (like saving throws), some support for paladin or ranger
characters, and the Fix command for automated magical healing; this Fix command
is in all later Gold Box games natively.  It also adds a bunch of hacking and
cheating features, if that's your thing.

SECTION 2.6 - Game Interface Basics
-----------------------------------

This is described at some length in the documentation, but here are some
comments on non-obvious elements:

ADJUSTING GAME SPEED
You can adjust game speed with:
* the "D"elay command in-game;
* (DOSBox, any branch) Ctrl-F11 and Ctrl-F12;
* (DOSBox-X only) CPU > Emulate CPU Speed.
If you set "D"elay to 0, many messages will flash by too quickly for you to
read on mostsetups.  ~7000 cycles/second and "D"elay of 1 usually work well.

(If you want to approximate the IBM 5150 experience, try 240 cycles/second.  I
can't recommend this.)

MOVING AROUND THE FIRST-PERSON VIEW
When moving around in the first-person display, use the left and right arrow
keys to turn, the up arrow key to move forward, and the down arrow key to turn
around.  Moving forward consumes 1 minute of game time.  Turning does not take
any time, and has no chance of triggering random encounters.

You can use the "A"rea command to toggle an overhead map of your current area;
however, the map doesn't show details (not even doors), does not work in all
areas, and shows areas you haven't yet visited.  A better automap is available
if you are running Gold Box Companion.

In order to thoroughly search the square you are in, use the "L"ook command,
which takes 10 minutes.  If you want to do this automatically in every square
you move through, you can toggle this with the "S"earch command.  Taking this
much time drastically increases the chances you will get a random encounter,
however (though it is less than by a factor of 10).

If you want to deliberately trigger a random combat, a way to do so taking
minimal time is to hold down a movement key when you can't actually move.  In
the first-person view, hold Up in the first-person view with a wall in front of
you; doing this with walls to both sides minimizes the size of the combat.  On
the Wilderness map, you can hold Down into the Moonsea.

SAVING AND LOADING THE GAME
You can save the game by encamping and issuing the "S"ave command.  If you do
not want to save the game, hitting Escape will skip the save.  You will then be
asked if you want to exit to DOS or not.  (If you try to quit to DOS in a
training hall with a party, you will be asked to save the game, and you cannot
skip that.)

You can only load the game from the game's main menu, or if you drop all
characters at a training hall.  (Or if you use an emulator with save states.)

WARNING ABOUT SAVED CHARACTERS
If you load a saved game, any individual character that had been "R"emoved from
the party will be deleted outside of the saved game.  This can cause unexpected
effects that don't happen in later Gold Box games.  You should back up your
characters routinely if you ever swap out characters, as it's easy to
accidentally delete a character.

COMBAT
* The space bar will turn off all autocombat.
* Alt-Q turns on autocombat for your entire party.
* Distance is not quite Euclidean; a diagonal move is always 1.5 squares, and
  fractions may be rounded down.  If you aim 12 squares west and 5 squares
  south, that's a distance of 14 = (12 - 5) + 5 * 1.5, not 13 = sqrt(12 ^ 2
  + 5 ^ 2).
* A single square is 10 feet by 10 feet.  That means a 2x2 ancient dragon fits
  into a square 20 feet on a side, which is a tight squeeze.  Also, that means
  that a three-square-wide door is 30 feet wide.  (Don't think about this too
  hard.)
* You can attack a monster in melee either with the "A"im command, or by
  moving into one.  If you run out of movement points next to your target, you
  must "A"im.
* You can also use the "A"im command just to look around and see what is where;
  there's no better way of doing this as you can't zoom out.
* "D"elay will move your current action to later in the round.
* "G"uard will end your action for this round, and give you an attack of
  opportunity on the next monster to move next to you, until it is your turn
  again.  You must be using a melee weapon to have this command available.
* "Q"uit simply forfeits any action for that round.  This should not be
  confused with the "Q" command for turning on auto-combat for that specific
  character.  If one of your characters mysteriously enters auto-combat, this
  UI quirk is the reason.

MISSING INTERFACE FEATURES
The interface features missing from this game that are present in later games
include:
* Mouse support (though this was never polished; Gold Box games play well
  enough with only the keyboard).
* The Fix command, which automates healing (Gold Box Companion adds this).
* The game doesn't automatically remember which spells you've used, so that
  you can re-memorize the same spells (Gold Box Companion adds this).
* Some later games will highlight characters who can gain a level in purple;
  you'll have to track this either yourself or with Gold Box Companion.
* There is no option to change the game difficulty.  If you want to play this
  game in challenge mode, try lower starting statistics or other restrictions.
* The game isn't as intelligent as its successors when selecting potential
  targets for ranged attacks; it will cycle through allies, which means that
  manual targeting is often faster.

SECTION 2.7 - Restarting the Game
---------------------------------

All Gold Box games allow you to restart your game at any time, which restarts
the plot but allows you to keep all experience, spells, items, and money.

To do this:

  1. Go to a training hall.
  2. "R"emove all characters from the party.
  3. "Q"uit to DOS.
  4. Restart Pool of Radiance.
  5. "A"dd the characters you want to restart the game with.

This will not necessarily work 100% correctly in other Gold Box games (strange
things may happen if you try this in any game where character files have plot
state, like Countdown to Doomsday), but does here.

SECTION 2.8.1 - Transferring Characters to Curse of the Azure Bonds
-------------------------------------------------------------------

You must "R"emove characters from your Pool of Radiance party for COPYCURS.EXE
to work.  You should also select "Other" for where your saved characters are
going from and to.  Unlike later Gold Box games, you can't simply tell the
configuration routine where the saved games are.

Characters created in Curse of the Azure Bonds start with 25,000 experience, so
you can start to transfer characters profitably once you exceed that in Pool of
Radiance.

Any abnormal statistics of 19 or more will be rounded down to 18, so you
cannot keep high Constitution scores from Manuals of Bodily Health, or the
Strength 21 conferred by a Potion of Giant Strength.  Do note that Strength 19+
will be rounded down to 18, not 18(00) as you may expect.

You do otherwise get to keep statistics; you can even keep Strength of up to
18(00) granted by either Gauntlets of Ogre Power or the Enlarge spell.  You do
keep Dexterity 19 or Constitution 19 that an elf or dwarf can get.

You keep any extra hit points gained from abnormal Constitution, or from the
improperly implemented rules for gaining hit points as a multi-classed
character.   Multi-classed characters may not gain any hit points the first
time they train in Curse, but gain hit points normally thereafter.

You do not keep any items or money, though everyone starts with 300 platinum.
That's a Bag of Plot Spilling much stronger than that of the tabletop version,
where you get to keep most magical items.

Magic-users do keep knowledge of all the spells they've learned.  Clerics
actually do not, because Animate Dead does not exist in any other Gold Box
game.

Follow this step-by-step procedure for a minimum of problems:

  1. If you want to hack a fighter to paladin or ranger, it's best to have
     enough experience to gain a level in Curse of the Azure Bonds as one of
     those classes.
  2. Make sure your characters are not under the effect of a Potion of Giant
     Strength.  Effects that set Strength to 18(00) are okay, but the transfer
     routine will make such effects permanent.
  3. Go to a training hall and "R"emove all the characters you want to
     transfer.
  4. Run COPYCURS.EXE and transfer your characters from Pool of Radiance to
     Curse of the Azure Bonds.
  5. Start Curse of the Azure Bonds.
  6. "A"dd desired characters from "P"ool.
  7. "R"emove them from the party immediately.
  8. If you want to hack a fighter to paladin or ranger, create a brand new
     paladin or ranger.
  9. Exit Curse of the Azure Bonds.
 10. For each character, use a hex editor to open the appropriate *.GUY files,
     and change offset 0x10 to match the value of offset 0x11.  These both
     represent Strength without extraordinary strength, so these values should
     be 18 for most maximized characters.  If you fail to do this, the Enlarge
     spell will not work on any transferred characters, as the transfer
     algorithm usually does not set offset 0x10 correctly.
 11. If you want to hack a fighter to paladin or ranger:
     a. Open the *.GUY file of the fighter in a hex editor.
     b. Change offset 0x75 from 2 (fighter) to 3 (paladin) or 4 (ranger).
     c. Offset 0x10B is your current fighter level; change this to 0.
     d. Change offset 0x10C (for paladin) or 0x10D (for ranger) to whatever
        your current fighter level had been.
     e. Make a copy of the *.FX file from a newly generated paladin or ranger
        and give it the same name as your character's.
 12. Re-start Curse of the Azure Bonds and "A"dd your fixed characters from
     "C"urse.  A hacked paladin or ranger will need to gain a level to fully
     restore normal behavior.

SECTION 2.8.2 - Transferring Characters to Hillsfar
---------------------------------------------------

Unlike transferring from Pool of Radiance, you can retain abnormal high
statistics from Hillsfar when moving to Curse of the Azure Bonds.

High statistics are also retained transferring from Pool of Radiance to
Hillsfar, so an indirect transfer does let you keep high statistics.

This transfer circumvents the Strength bug that blocks Enlarge from working.

If you are eligible to gain a level, you will automatically gain appropriate
levels, but gain no hit points for these levels.


SECTION 3.1 - What You Should Know Before Creating Your Party
-------------------------------------------------------------

You should have one thief in your party.  There aren't that many checks for
thief skills in the Gold Box series, but they happen often enough that it is
convenient to have one around; a few sidequests require a thief, and eventually
the backstab feature does enough damage that it is worth the trouble to set up
in combat.  Backstabbing helps more in later games than this one, because it
works awkwardly here.  Backstabbing works better with the combat skill and
Strength of a fighter, so your thief should multi-class with fighter at least.
More than one thief in your party is not useful.

You should have at least one cleric in your party, because otherwise there is
no good way to heal.  No non-human can reach higher than level 5 in cleric, so
humans make the best clerics.  Even though the maximum cleric level in Pool of
Radiance is 6, it is still worthwhile having a human cleric around, because
there is a large leap in the power to turn undead between levels 5 and 6.  You
definitely want a human cleric if you plan to transfer characters to Curse of
the Azure Bonds.  You should have one other person capable of at least a little
healing; I recommend a multi-classed half-elf cleric in this game and a paladin
or knight in most other D&D Gold Box games.  More clerics do not really help
all that much; clerics just do not have the awesome spellcasting power of
either magic-users or D&D 3E clerics.

Having numerous fighters around is helpful, both for their high hit points and
good armor, and because unlike D&D 3E and later, many monsters simply aren't
affected by magic (which doesn't make much difference here, but becomes much
more relevant in later Gold Box games).  I recommend at least three, to serve
as your front line in combat.

Magic-users can deliver awesome magical effects even at low levels, so you want
to have several of those around too; the game becomes significantly harder if
you have fewer than two.

Getting many fighters and magic-users can be done with multi-classing in this
game, as dual-classing is not available.

Males are physically much stronger than females, so all fighters should be
male.  There is one quest in Curse of the Azure Bonds that requires a female
character, so you should have one female character just for that, but there is
no other gameplay reason to have a female in your party.

There is about enough experience available in all the Forgotten Realms Gold Box
games to hit all level caps without grinding if you explore thoroughly, even
triple-classed characters in the case of clerics and magic-users.  You can
therefore freshly generate characters in later games and not worry about them
being permanently behind.  (Note that this is not true for the Krynn Gold Box
games.)

Gnomes and halflings have a low level cap in fighter.  They have unlimited
advancement as thieves, but so do all other races.  There is no quest in any
Gold Box game for which specifically having one of these helps at all, so you
can safely not use either.

Half-elves make good cleric/fighter/magic-users.  Their racial level limit does
not have much impact in Pool of Radiance, but it becomes severely limiting in
later games; a maximized half-elf cleric/fighter/magic-user transferred to
Curse of the Azure Bonds will hit all the level caps before even leaving the
first town.

A dwarf is only really useful as a fighter/thief, though they are fairly good
at being those.  However, a fighter/magic-user/thief is more useful still, and
there is enough experience around to deal with the lower leveling rate.  Many
lower level magic-user spells are actually still useful even late in Pools of
Darkness.  There are a few places where the dwarf's familiarity with the
underground comes in handy, but it's far fewer than where a thief's abilities
come in useful (and in several cases, having either will work, so having both
is redundant).  The higher level cap of a dwarf fighter versus an elf does help
some, but not as much as you might think:
* elves still can get the extra half-attack at 7th level;
* elves get +1 accuracy with several key weapons;
* by the later games, most of your accuracy will come from items, magic, and
  the much higher levels humans can achieve.

Gnomes, halflings, and dwarves all do get significant saving throw bonuses, but
there aren't many spellcasting enemies in Pool of Radiance, and in later games
their level caps being too restrictive outweighs that -- you get better saving
throws with higher levels, anyway.

Elves have decent level limits in fighter (7th) and magic-user (11th), and the
+1 bonus to attack they get with short/long swords and bows also comes in
handy.

Alignment has little game effect; it limits what classes you can be, and
affects the Protection from Evil and Protection from Good spells.  No actions
you take will change your alignment, either.  (You'd think it would, because
alignment has larger effects in both Wizardry or Might and Magic, the other
classic CRPG series that have alignments.  You can get away with being a murder
hobo in this game and still be hailed as a hero!)  There is one Long Sword +2
that may only be equipped by a lawful good fighter, so it helps a little if all
your non-thief fighters are lawful good as well.  If you are transferring
characters to Curse of the Azure Bonds, you should avoid evil characters as
paladins may not be in the same party as an evil character.

You should maximize all relevant statistics before setting out ("M"odify
character).  It may seem like cheating, but later Gold Box games are very much
balanced around having very high statistics, and if you plan to transfer
characters to later games in the series, the documentation explicitly tells you
that your characters need primary statistics of 18.  (Well ... you don't NEED
to do this, but that amounts to playing in extra-challenging mode in Gold Box
games with a high level limit.)

You don't actually need such absurdly high stats with the help of this guide
though if you're not going all the way to Pools of Darkness, so you might
prefer normal stats.  If you do, Dexterity is the most important statistic; the
initiative and Armor Class bonuses you get are both very strong, and the bonus
to ranged accuracy is an added plus.  It is actually more important than
focusing on getting Constitution for the hit point bonus; as is generally the
case in RPGs and strategy games, speed is king.  Having good Strength is no
more than a convenience, since you can eventually cast Enlarge as needed.

SECTION 3.2 - Party for This Game Only
--------------------------------------

If you do not plan to transfer your characters to later games at all, one power
party that works well is:

  4 Male Half-Elf Lawful Good Cleric/Fighter/Magic-Users
  1 Female Human Cleric
  1 Male Elf Fighter/Magic-User/Thief

This gets you a lot of both spellcasting power and fighting power.  You will
advance in levels slowly, but there is enough experience around that you will
still hit many of the level caps before the game ends.

Having more than about 2 clerics does not really help much, however; and the
faster level advancement from having fewer classes does get you more fighting
skill and the better magic-user spells faster.  The +1 bonus that full-blooded
elves get in combat with long swords and bows is also useful.  Thus I think the
best party is:

  3 Male Elf Lawful Good Fighter/Magic-Users
  1 Male Half-Elf Lawful Good Cleric/Fighter/Magic-User
  1 Female Human Cleric
  1 Male Elf Fighter/Magic-User/Thief

The main adjustment you might make is to have replace one of the elves with
another half-elf cleric/fighter/magic-user; if you are not using Gold Box
Companion, this makes healing more convenient.

SECTION 3.3 - Party for All Four Games
--------------------------------------

The second party above also works best if you plan to transfer characters to
later games.  You still have a thief, two clerics, and plenty of fighters and
magic-users; you also have the one female character needed to complete one of
the quests in Curse of the Azure Bonds.

I would recommend a paladin and rangers in this game if you could actually
create them here.  Some people create pure fighters for this game and use hacks
to switch them to those classes in Curse of the Azure Bonds; see the next
section if you plan to do that.  This is the most practical way of retaining
most characters through all four games.

More recent versions of Gold Box Companion will allow you to play a paladin or
ranger in this game.

With the above party, the plan in Curse of the Azure Bonds is to drop the
half-elf and two of the fighter/magic-users, and replace them with a paladin
and multiple rangers in Curse of the Azure Bonds.  There is enough experience
available there that you can eventually drop the last elf fighter/magic user in
favor of another ranger.

Rangers in later games are fantastic when dual-classed to magic-user after
reaching a minimum of level 9.  Also, there is enough experience available in
Secret of the Silver Blades to start yet more rangers there, so they can be
dual-classed to magic-user at higher levels.  (Long-term planners should bear
in mind that you cannot have more than three characters in your party whose
current class is ranger.  Yes, this restriction from the tabletop rules is
actually enforced and actually becomes limiting!)

SECTION 3.4 - Party for Hackers
-------------------------------

If you don't mind editing your characters to get around not being able to
create a paladin or ranger here, and are not using Gold Box Companion to do so,
you can replace two or all three of the Elf Fighter/Magic-Users in the above
party with human fighters, and hack them into paladin or ranger immediately
after you transfer to Curse of the Azure Bonds.  The game gets significantly
harder if you have fewer than two magic-users, so don't drop below that.

If you are a huge anti-fan of racial level limits (I don't blame you for that!)
you can edit a character to human after character creation, giving you a
multi-classed character with no racial evel limits.  Given the high power
levels in the later Gold Box games, this doesn't actually disturb game balance
nearly as much as it would in other AD&D campaigns.

If you're going to go full-blown class/race hacking, then I suggest:
  1 Male Fighter (edit to Paladin in Curse, then eventually dual-class)
  1 Male Fighter (edit to Ranger in Curse, then eventually dual-class)
  1 Male Fighter/Magic-User
  1 Male Cleric/Fighter/Magic-User
  1 Female Cleric (dual-class to Magic-User in Pools of Darkness)
  1 Male Fighter/Magic-User/Thief

Dual-classing still gives you significant benefits, so I'd still plan on that
with some characters instead of multi-classing everyone.  This is a good way
to use the exact same party through all four games.


SECTION 4.1.1 - Initial Equipment
---------------------------------

Don't forget to "M"odify your characters' statistics before starting out!

Any character with thief as one class should buy leather armor, even if they
can equip something better, because backstabbing is not allowed with heavier
armor.  You will quickly find better armor for a thief anyway.

Fighters and clerics should buy banded mail, not plate mail.  The one extra
point of Armor Class that nonmagical plate mail provides is not worth the
additional costs in gold, encumbrance, and movement.

Fighters and clerics should buy a shield.

Pure clerics should start with a flail, and pure magic-users with a
quarterstaff.  Anyone else should begin with a long sword.

You do not need to buy bows; you should find some soon enough after starting
the game.  Once you do, buy some arrows to go with them.  Pure magic-users
should eventually buy a few darts.

Every fighter should soon have a mace or flail, to deal with skeletons.  A bit
later on, two-handed swords do significant extra damage against larger
creatures if you are willing to give up a shield, though elves don't get their
racial bonus to-hit with one.

The old-school CRPG trick of creating a bunch of dummy characters, taking their
gold, and deleting them does work here, but it isn't really even worth the time
it takes.

SECTION 4.1.2 - Upgrading Equipment
-----------------------------------

The fine composite long bow is absolutely worth buying once you can afford its
25000 gold price tag, since it adds a Strength bonus to arrow damage.  That is
a large enough benefit that it is superior to most magical bows you will find;
you will need to get lucky with random magical items for better.  It isn't
quite properly implemented; the AI does not recognize it as a bow, and elves do
not get their racial +1 to-hit bonus with one.

You may eventually want to have mirrors to deal with basilisks, medusas, and
vampires, which are never random encounters; having one of these equipped will
automatically reflect or prevent their gaze attack.  (Unlike in the tabletop
game, you do not need to take any other special precautions to avoid their
gaze attacks.)

You do not need silver melee weapons, as magical weapons perform at least as
well against monsters that are vulnerable to silver weapons, and you will find
enough of them soon enough.  (The concept of monsters that require weapons that
are silver AND magical only starts in D&D 3E.)  You might as well eventually
buy silver arrows, as there is no place to buy magical arrows here.

You should keep a reasonable number of copies of the Detect Magic spell
memorized so you can check set encounters and special enemies for magical
treasure; this is the main way you will get stronger magical weaponry.  (You
can also just use the magical item checklists elsewhere in this guide.)

A thief should get magical leather armor, or better yet Bracers of Defense, as
soon as possible.  Pure magic-users have no choice but to use bracers.  Both
are best served augmenting bracers with your best Rings of Protection.

Your other fighters and clerics should eventually upgrade to magical plate
mail, which does not have the disadvantages nonmagical plate mail has.  If you
have a large supply of Bracers of Defense and Rings of Protection, those may be
better.  The best combination in this game is Bracers AC 2 with a Ring of
Protection +3, which provide armor as good as Plate Mail +4 without the
encumbrance.  Bracers AC 2 is a very rare (0.09%) random magical item; AC 4 is
much easier to come by.  Unlike later games, there don't exist enough magical
rings that taking up a ring slot is a significant concern.

Many magical items are very straightforward, but the common tricky one is the
Ring of Protection.  It improves armor class by its bonus if you are not
already wearing magical armor; it is a nice ring to use if you are using
Bracers of Defense.  A Ring of Protection should, even if it does not provide
an armor class bonus, add its bonus to all saving throws (though only a few
actually do so in Pool of Radiance).  Multiple Rings of Protection do not
stack; only the best applies.

One thing to watch out for is items disappearing seemingly at random.  Unlike
it happening in other old-school RPGs, this is not a bug.  You will never lose
any items that are not light items (a light item is less than 2.5 pounds)
unless you are offering a bribe or clearly surrendering.  The two non-obvious
places you can lose even light items are in New Phlan's taverns (just stay away
from the pickpockets there once you've made any real progress), and in the
Kobold Caves.  Equipping an item does not stop an item from being stolen, but a
bug lets you dramatically reduce the chance of item theft if you put the
your heaviest items (i.e., body armor) at the top of your inventory.

SECTION 4.2 - NPCs
------------------

You can hire NPCs of all four classes at the training hall in Phlan.

I don't usually recommend doing this.  The main reasons to hire NPCs are:
* for the ogre/troll combat in the Slums;
* for the orc/hobgoblin attack in Sokal Keep;
* for opening hard-to-open doors with a NPC magic-user;
* for acquiring their equipment.

The reasons not to hire NPCs include:

* You are unable to control NPCs in combat.  Later games may permit you to make
  a Charisma-based leadership check to manually control NPCs yourself, but
  that isn't possible here.

* NPCs aren't very bright.  NPC mages may happily toast your own characters
  with a fireball; this is more likely in v1.0 than in v1.3.  NPC fighters
  aren't as destructive, but they may still blindly charge your foes when more
  subtle tactics are called for.  You can help NPC fighters out by making sure
  they have a bow and arrows, which will reduce their enthusiasm for reckless
  charges.

  The NPC AI is better in later games.  (They also are never mages in games
  after Curse of the Azure Bonds; a lot of people complained about getting
  destroyed by "friendly" AI fireballs back in the day.)

* NPCs take some experience.  If you rely on NPCs a lot, you might not actually
  hit Pool of Radiance's level caps.

* Hired NPCs take some loot.  They do *not* ever take items as the game claims
  they do; they do take money, but it's not what they say they take.

* NPCs increase Party Strength, and thus the size of some random encounters.

* Hired NPCs, unlike PCs, check morale in combat.

* While you can trade items freely to NPCs, you cannot take anything from
  them unless they are unconscious or dead.

* Removing the charmed effect from a charmed hired NPC won't necessarily
  restore proper behavior.

* A few hired NPCs automatically betray the party near the end of the game.

* You cannot transfer any NPC to later games in the series.

* If you do give NPCs charged magical items, they are very enthusiastic about
  always using the more powerful ones.  That actually makes sense for either
  monsters or strict 1E tabletop game initiative balance, but it's undesirable
  for allies here.

Some of the stronger NPCs have magical equipment, so you can *ahem* tragically
get them killed in combat, then *cough* honor their memory by taking their
equipment so it doesn't go to waste.  The better NPC equipment is carried by:
* HERO (#109), carries Plate Mail +1;
* THEURGIST (#110), carries a Ring of Protection +1 that also improves saving
  throws.  This is the only Ring of Protection in this game where that was
  properly implemented.
These are the two NPCs you most want to hire even aside from their equipment.

Some NPCs will join you for plot-related reasons.  Once you get one of these
characters, I recommend focusing on their related quest as soon as possible.

You can manipulate two such plot-related NPCs (Skullcrusher and Dirten) into
staying permanently; they will not take any items or money.  Skullcrusher will
leave if you pass by the entrance to the Phlan city hall, and Dirten will leave
when you clear the Temple of Bane, so simply don't have those characters in
your party at those times.

SECTION 4.3 - Training Your Characters
--------------------------------------

Once a character has enough experience to gain a level, training costs 1000
gold at the appropriate training hall in town.  It can be worthwhile to break
off adventuring to train if you accrue enough experience to do so, though there
generally isn't an urgent need to do so unless you have so much experience that
everyone can train.  (If you wait too long, you run the risk of losing
experience from the rule that prevents you from gaining more than one level at
a time.)

You should pinch pennies early in the game, because training is a significant
expense early.  Appraise and sell all your jewelry and gems; you will
eventually find more anyway.  As traditional in classic CRPGs, later in the
game you'll have more money than you'll know what to do with.

You will gain a random number of hit points with each level; you may want to
reload the game until you can get maximum hit points.  If you do not have
access to save states, the quickest way is the following:

  1. "S"ave the game in the training hall.
  2. Train the appropriate character.
  3. If you don't gain enough hit points, "D"rop everyone from the party.
  4. "L"oad the game and try again.

A single-classed human cleric will hit the level cap fairly early.  If you
are transferring characters to later games, you may want to train a second or
even third single-classed human cleric.  It is useful to have such clerics gain
enough (110,000) experience to gain two levels at the beginning of Curse of the
Azure Bonds.

Multiple human clerics are useful in later games, because you can dual-class
some to magic-user and let others continue to progress as a clerics.  Also, if
planning for many games from now, in Pools of Darkness it is useful to have two
high-level clerics at the same time, whom you can also dual-class to magic-
user.

If you are training a single-classed fighter and planning to hack him in Curse
of the Azure Bonds, he can use as much as 325,000 experience as a hacked
ranger, and 700,000 experience as a hacked paladin.

SECTION 4.4 - Magic-User Spells to Learn
----------------------------------------

There are many more magic-user spells than there are spell picks available to
use on them; you want the following spells the most (you can skip spells you
have scrolls for):

Level 1 Spells: take either Enlarge (not useful right away, but it's a strong
  buff later in the game) or Charm Person.
Level 2 Spells: one magic-user should learn Knock; all others learn Stinking
  Cloud.  Afterwards, one magic-user who already knows Stinking Cloud should
  pick up Invisibility.
Level 3 Spells: for everyone you don't have a scroll to learn it from, take
  Fireball.  After that, you'll want one person with Haste and a couple with
  Slow.  The other useful spells are Blink, Hold Person, and Lightning Bolt.


SECTION 5.1 - General Nonmagical Tactics
----------------------------------------

Overcoming the difficulty of combat in the Gold Box games is best done by
proper party selection, acquiring (and remembering to equip!) the proper
equipment, and memorizing the best spells in advance.

That aside, here are other tactical pointers:

* If there is a choke point available, make use of it and force your enemies to
  come to you.  There won't always be one, but sometimes you will be confronted
  with many dozens of enemies and be endangered by sheer strength of numbers.

  You can also create choke points by paralyzing monsters with Sleep, Hold
  Person, or Stinking Cloud, then using their frozen bodies as meat shields.
  Vulnerable monsters will also not enter a Stinking Cloud, so you can
  directly use that spell to create or block a choke point.

* Have your fighters form a line.  Doing so prevents any of them from getting
  completely surrounded, and they can shield more fragile characters behind
  them.

* If possible, anchor this line against walls or other terrain features.  This
  prevents enemies from surrounding and flanking the fighters at the end of the
  line.

* Most of the enemies in this game have no ranged attacks.  If there is space
  in between you and them, it is often better to "D"elay your move and let them
  close distance before making your own moves.

* Keep your primary cleric away from the front lines.  She may be heavily
  armored, but you don't want her to get disabled!  Cleric spells also cast
  slowly compared to magic-user spells, so clerics are more likely to get their
  spells interrupted by damage.

* The party member to be protected the most (primary cleric or single-classed
  magic-user) should be third-to-last in the order, as positions farther down
  are more vulnerable to being flanked.  Your better-armored fighters with the
  most hit points should all be in the top half.

* Avoid walking away from enemies you are in melee range of, because that gives
  them all attacks of opportunity at a large bonus to hit.

  This bonus can easily be +7 right at the start of the game: you can lose a +4
  bonus to Armor Class from Dexterity, the +1 bonus from a shield, and the
  standard +2 bonus on top of that for any back attack.

* If you are not in danger of being swarmed, you can get significant bonuses
  to hit with back attacks, and thieves can do huge damage with backstabs.
  These tend to leave your characters vulnerable, however, and backstabs work
  awkwardly compared to later Gold Box games.

* A bow and arrows do significant damage, especially once you have a fine
  composite long bow, or are lucky enough to find a bow +2 or +3.  This is
  especially true early in the game, because you can shoot two arrows from a
  bow but only get one normal melee attack.

SECTION 5.2 - Magical Spell Strategy
------------------------------------

BEST SPELLS
The strongest combat spell in the early game is Sleep, by far.  This will
reliably knock out low-level living enemies in its square and in the eight
adjacent squares (including your own low-level characters, so aim properly).
Unlike many other spells, Sleep does not permit a saving throw.  You can then
dispatch sleeping foes at your leisure; any physical attack will eliminate
a sleeping enemy.

Sleep will rapidly lose effectiveness against more powerful enemies; it will
not work on anything with 6 or more levels or hit dice, so the strongest
enemies you can affect with it are foes like ogres and level 4 fighters.

Fortunately, you will get two more strong disabling spells at level 3: the
2nd-level cleric spell Hold Person, and the 2nd-level magic-user spell Stinking
Cloud.  Hold Person will paralyze up to 3 humanoid enemies at medium range, and
Stinking Cloud creates a 2x2 cloud at short range that has a chance of
disabling vulnerable enemies within every round.  These should both be always
kept on hand once they become available.  Stinking Cloud can also be used to
block or create choke points, since vulnerable enemies will not enter one (the
AI does not have this deficiency in later Gold Box games); it will also prevent
spellcasting even on a successful saving throw.

When a magic-user reaches level 5, both Fireball and Lightning Bolt become
available.  Fireball is generally the better spell against the huge hordes of
monsters you encounter in this game.  Lightning Bolt is useful against smaller
numbers of targets, since you can bounce a bolt off a wall and hit a few
monsters twice, and monsters often spawn in straight lines.

Cure Light Wounds is the only curative spell you can cast in this game; the
number of healing potions you will find is very limited, it takes 24 hours to
recover a single hit point with normal rest, and it can take a long time to
return to a temple to heal.  So you always want multiple copies of this spell
prepared.  This spell is slow to cast, so you need to protect any clerics
casting this in the middle of combat.  (If your characters have Constitution
20+, this spell isn't as important, as that permits rapid regeneration.)

Protection from Evil, once you can spare the 1st-level spell slots for it,
provides significant protection for your characters in major combats.  The
clerical version lasts longer.

Prayer is a strong, general-purpose buff/debuff spell; it both improves THAC0
and saving throws for allies, and imposes penalties on enemies.

OTHER BUFF SPELLS
Bless can be cast from the start, and is a good way to subtly alter the odds in
your favor.  Additionally, it never becomes fully obsolete.

Spiritual Hammer is a good way for a single-classed cleric to gain a ranged
attack.  This isn't a worthwhile spell either in later games (where staff
slings become available), or if you are multi-classed with fighter (just use
a bow).

Enlarge will increase a character's strength, up to 18(00) cast at level 6.  It
isn't useful early unless your fighters have especially low Strength, but
becomes useful starting around level 4...5.

Shield is somewhat useful later on, when you can spare a low-level spell slot
for a +1 bonus to all saving throws.

Invisibility will last forever until the target does something that dispels the
invisibility, so it can be a great setup spell before a fixed combat.  You can
re-memorize and cast it repeatedly to make the whole party invisible, if you
are in a safe location.  (Cast it on yourself last.)

Mirror Image is a worthwhile protection spell, once you have enough 2nd-level
magic-user spell slots, but a bug makes it not work reliably against physical
attacks, only magical attacks that are not area-of-effect.  (It only functions
properly starting in Secret of the Silver Blades.)

Blink is also a strong protection spell, though it's more useful in later Gold
Box games as 3rd-level magic-user spell slots are in such short supply here.
It also must be cast in combat, which makes actually protecting yourself with
it awkward.

Haste is a good spell to cast before major combats later in the game.  Casting
this will age every party member by 1 year, so you shouldn't cast it regularly.
You will eventually be able to purchase Elixirs of Youth in Pools of Darkness,
so this aging will be eventually reversible.  (Age starts to become an issue
once you receive this spell about 20 times as a human -- though the negative
effects of aging do not actually trigger until later Gold Box games.)

These buffs are marginal or useless:
  * Protection from Good (there aren't many good enemies in this game, though
    there are a few important exceptions)
  * Resist Cold (nothing in this game can even inflict cold damage)
  * Resist Fire (few monsters in this game inflict fire damage, and there are
    several Rings of Fire Resistance; it is however convenient to aim fireballs
    and not have to worry as much about collateral damage to your characters)
  * Friends (this buff has too short a duration to be of much use)
  * Detect Invisibility (facing invisible enemies is rare in the Gold Box
    games)
  * Strength (Stinking Cloud is usually better, Mirror Image may be a better
    buff for a 2nd-level magic-user spell, and eventually Enlarge always grants
    superior strength)
  * Invisibility 10' Radius, Protection from Evil/Good 10' Radius, and
    Protection from Normal Missiles (3rd-level magic-user spell slots have
    better uses)

OTHER DEBUFF SPELLS
Curse is a reasonable debuff for clerics to cast in major combats, though most
of the rest of the time you are better off with extra copies of Cure Light
Wounds.  It does affect monster morale, so it can be cast against intelligent
opponents to persuade them to surrender.  Its long casting delay makes it
awkward.

Silence, 15' Radius is good for disabling spellcasting enemies.  It is
sometimes easier to get this to work by casting this on a weaker enemy next to
the enemy spellcaster you actually want to silence.

Charm Person is a decent combat use of 1st-level magic-user spell slots.  It
will only affect one enemy, however.  Its effectiveness partly arises from the
fact that a charmed enemy will absorb attacks that the party may have otherwise
taken.

Slow is a strong debuff spell to cast in late-game major combats, as it has a
wide area of effect.

These debuffs are marginal or useless:
  * Snake Charm (very specialized)
  * Cause Blindness, Cause Disease, and Bestow Curse (minimal effects, and all
    require two rolls for even that)
  * Reduce (does almost nothing)
  * Ray of Enfeeblement (not strong or reliable enough)

OTHER SPELLS
You should always keep Detect Magic on hand to identify valuable magical items.

Cause Light Wounds is slow to cast, must be cast in melee range, and requires
a melee attack roll, so it is not worthwhile to cast on monsters.  (If you are
exploiting the bug that a targeted combat spell can raise the dead, this still
can fail; Burning Hands works better.)

Slow Poison is marginally useful; it can revive anyone "killed" by poison for a
while, but if the effect expires the target will die for real.  This is not
worth casting unless you can get to a temple to cast Neutralize Poison in time.
It's not useless, though, since it's a way of reviving a character in the
middle of combat, which is otherwise not possible.

Animate Dead is not particularly strong when animating a Dead player character,
as you won't have the control you normally do.  It is much more worthwhile to
cast upon slain non-monstrous humanoids, where it can raise multiple allies to
turn the tide in combat.

Cure Disease is something you should have prepared before fighting mummies
(which only appear in Valhingen Graveyard); disease can permanently drain
Strength quickly, fast enough that camping to prepare a copy of the spell after
you catch a disease is too slow.  (The Cause Disease spell may also target you,
but it's both unlikely and less of a threat.)

Dispel Magic is useful for countering the effects of hostile charm or hold
spells.

Remove Curse is hardly ever useful; you should only memorize it when there is
a specific need for it.

Magic Missile does little damage at level 1, so it's not worth using compared
to Sleep then.  At higher levels, Sleep loses effectiveness, and the guaranteed
accuracy of Magic Missile makes it a worthwhile use of 1st-level magic-user
spell slots.

Burning Hands and Shocking Grasp only work at close range, and aren't nearly as
good as Sleep at low levels, or Magic Missile at higher levels.  (If you are
not averse to exploiting bugs, Burning Hands can raise the dead.)

Knock is sometimes needed to get through a door; a few will resist most or all
attempts at either "B"ashing or "P"icking them.

SECTION 5.3 - Other Magical Tactics
-----------------------------------

* Invisible characters will only be attacked by adjacent enemies, and can
  safely move away from enemies without triggering attacks of opportunity.
  Neither of these applies if the monster can see invisible.

* If everyone is invisible, and your opposition is neither able to see
  invisible nor in melee range, you can get a free round by "D"elaying with
  everyone until all the monsters have moved.

* The Dust of Disappearance is the most powerful consumable item in the game,
  as it will turn your entire party invisible in such a way that even attacking
  or spellcasting does not dispel the invisible effect.

* The Necklace of Missiles can cast fireballs.  It has a very limited number
  of charges normally, but if found as a random magical item, typically has
  20 charges.

* You will only rarely fight spellcasting enemies in Pool of Radiance.  If any
  have area attacks, you should instead scatter your party members so one spell
  can't take many of them out.  You can also inflict at least a little damage
  on such enemies, as if you inflict even one point of damage on a spellcaster
  it cannot cast a spell that round.

* If you turn undead, and an undead is turned but not outright destroyed, it
  will flee combat (often requiring chasing it down as it gets stuck in some
  corner), not simply vanish into thin air as happens in later Gold Box games.
  It takes a level 6 cleric to have any chance of destroying and not just
  turning undead, so avoid doing so against lesser undead.

* In major combats where you must fight several battles consecutively, you do
  not have to actually end combat when asked; you can instead spend rounds
  casting Cure Light Wounds and extra buffs.

SECTION 5.4 - Tips for Specific Enemies
---------------------------------------

Basilisk - If you have everyone equip a mirror, you are fully protected from
  its petrifying gaze.

Bronze Dragon (controlled by the real Tyranthraxus) - Has 85% magic resistance,
  which causes all cast spells and scrolls to fail; wands *can* get through as
  they are level 12.  Cast all buff spells beforehand: Dust of Disappearance,
  Enlarge, and Resist Fire last long enough that they can be cast before you
  fight his bodyguards.  Bless, Protection from Good, Mirror Image, Blink,
  Haste, and Prayer can be cast before ending the combat with his bodyguards.

  Resist Fire will halve the damage from Tyranthraxus's fire aura, and
  Protection from Good actually provides significant protection.

Drider - Casts dangerous magic-user spells; scatter your party to minimize
  Fireball damage and launch your own in return.

Fire Giant - Immune to fire damage, but vulnerable to Stinking Cloud.

Huge Scorpion - Has a deadly poison attack; vulnerable to Sleep.

Medusa - As with the basilisk, an equipped mirror fully protects from its
  petrifying gaze.

Mummy - Only appears in the Valhingen Graveyard, which is one reason you should
  delay that quest as long as possible.  They can paralyze characters with
  their fear aura, so it helps to cast all the buffs you can to boost saving
  throws before you start combat.  You must have magical weapons to hit them
  in physical combat, and even that doesn't work too well since all weapon
  strikes do half damage.  Mummies take extra damage from Fireball and
  sometimes take ridiculous damage from Lightning Bolt, so use those liberally.

Ogre - You can disable a single ogre with a Sleep spell, which will work about
  half of the time.

Phase Spider - You can attack these even after they phase out, if you attack
  by moving into them instead of with the "A"im command.  They have a
  dangerous poison attack that you can combat either with simple maximum
  offense (unleash all the Stinking Clouds and Fireballs you can), or (if you
  have its patch applied) with Mirror Image.

Spectre - Only appears in set combats, which is fortunate since you can cast
  buff spells before combat to mitigate its level-draining attack.  Requires
  magic or magical weapons to damage.  Turning undead is unlikely to work even
  with a level 6 cleric.

Troll - Sleep will not work, though Stinking Cloud very well might.  Trolls
  will regenerate and rise from the dead if you let too many rounds pass after
  killing them.  You can prevent this by either winning the combat quickly, or
  by having someone stand on top of where you killed the troll.  (Fire/acid
  damage can prevent the regeneration, but it only works if *all* damage done
  is fire/acid.)

Vampire - Handle like a spectre, except you additionally want some way to deal
  with its charming gaze.  Equipping everyone with mirrors or holy symbols of
  Tyr will prevent the gaze attack; if you don't have those for everyone, Charm
  Person or Dispel Magic can counter the charm.  Cast buffs in advance to
  mitigate the level-draining attack.

Wight - These level-draining undead can appear in large numbers; you want
  magical weapons and especially the Fireball spell to handle them.  Turning
  undead with a higher-level cleric also works well, if there are no lower-
  level undead present.

Wraith - Similar to a spectre; handle the same way.

Wyvern - These have deadly poison melee attacks; you should have Stinking Cloud
  (offensive) or Mirror Image (defensive, if you have its patch applied)
  prepared on all magic-users.


SECTION 6.1 - Maps Introduction
-------------------------------

Maps are in a suggested order of difficulty.  The council will suggest missions
as you solve them, but most missions can be done even if not suggested, and you
will still be fully rewarded for doing them.

No mission is absolutely necessary for solving the game, except for defeating
Tyranthraxus; there's nothing actually stopping you from going straight to the
final confrontation right from game start.

The separate overview covers strategy, including tactical combat tips against
ordinary foes, but highlights only locations that are either required or have
significant treasure.  (Unrequired locations that only provide flavor or plot
are only in the details.)

The second and third maps in Journal Entry 37 give an accurate overview of the
areas you can visit.

You will get the Valhingen Graveyard mission early compared to how difficult it
is.  It scales to Party Strength in difficulty, but it's still much easier at
higher levels, so it should be one of the last quests you undertake.

As the Wilderness has some monsters that are dangerous for lower-level
characters, it is described relatively late.

Location numbering usually uses the in-game numbering also used by Gold Box
Companion and Gold Box Explorer.  (This is sometimes not practical.)

Enemies normally start right next to the party.  If distance 1 or 2 (squares
in the first-person view) is indicated, they will start farther way if there is
space.  Distance 1 generally can be closed by either side in one round;
distance 2 generally cannot.

The size of monster groups, especially random encounters, will often be
adjusted for Party Strength.  The Party Strength calculation takes into account
current hit points, armor class, THAC0, and spellcasting ability, detailed in
the Party Strength section.

Monsters will also sometimes not appear simply because there isn't space for
them on the tactical map.  This can be exploited by forcing an encounter in a
dead end where the only exit is behind the party, holding down "Up" to generate
random encounters until they are exhausted.

Experience awards listed are per character, and assume you have exactly six
characters in your party, unless otherwise stated.

SECTION 6.2.1 - Civilized Area (New Phlan) Overview
---------------------------------------------------

Plot background:

About fifty years ago, Phlan was attacked and reduced to ruins by a dragon
army.  Its strategic position on the Moonsea has recently made it the focus of
efforts by traders and adventurers to reclaim the ruins.

New Phlan is the recently-reclaimed section of Phlan.  Civilization's current
grip on the city is tenuous, with all the remaining sections of Old Phlan still
under monstrous control.  The current city's military has its hands full
simply maintaining the status quo; it is up to adventurers to reclaim more of
the city.

Strategy:

After creating your characters, buy melee weapons, armor, and shields.  Then,
stay in an inn to memorize spells.  Next, go to the Phlan clerk's office to
learn of the available commissions.  At first, only the quests to clear the
Slums and Sokal Keep will be mentioned and reachable.  If you are not familiar
with the game, you should start the former quest first.

Taverns are dangerous for brand-new characters and should be avoided at first.

SECTION 6.2.2 - Civilized Area (New Phlan) Details
--------------------------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15       ECL Script 0,
   ########################################~~~~~~~~~        8 (council),
 0 #    8         #HC+  +HM#HF#HT+        #~~~~~~~~~  0     11 (training hall)
   #  #++#######  ####  ####++#++#  #######/////////
 1 #  # 7     7+     +  +14      #  # 2   +      E1/  1   KEY:
   #  #  #######     #  #        #  #++####/////////
 2 #  #  #           +  +14      #        /~~~~~~~~~  2   # wall
   #  #  #           #############  #++#  //////////      / edge of dock
 3 #  # 7#      26                  # 6#           /  3   + door/archway
   #  #++#     #++#        ##########  #  //////////      ~ water
 4 +E2       26+27+26      + 6         #  /~~~~~~~~~  4
   ####++####  #  #######  #############  //////////      E  Entrance/exit
 5 #        +  #  +29+30#        + 5+              /  5   H  Training Hall
   ####  ####  #  #++####  ##########     //////////      IN Inn
 6 ####  #     #34#31   #  + 6      #     /~~~~~~~~~  6   SA Shop (arms/armor)
   ####  ####  #++####++#  ##########     //////////      SG Shop (general)
 7 #        +  #  +32 32#                          /  7   SJ shop (jeweler)
   ####  ####  #  #     #  #######++####  ####  ####      SS shop (special)
 8 ####  #     #  #   32#  #  #   TA   #  #SA#  +SG#  8   TA Tavern
   ####  ####  #  ####++#  #  #  #######  #++#  ####
 9 #        +  #  +33 33#  +TA#  #                 /  9
   #++#  #++#  #  #     #  #######  #++#++#  ####++#
10 #  #  #     #  #     #  #SJ+SG+  #SS#SG#  #   TA# 10
   #  #++#     ##########  #######  #######  #######
11 #                       +SA#SG#  +SG#           / 11
   #++#  #++#  #++#  ####  ####++#  ####  ////  ####
12 #24#  #24#  #IN#  #IN+           +SA#  /~~/  #  # 12
   #  ####  #  #  #  #  #  #++####++####  /~~/  #  #
13 #        #  #  #  #  #  #SA   #SS#     /~~/  #  # 13
   ##########  ####  ####  ####++####     /~~/  #  #
14 #      IN+                             /~~/  +TA# 14
   ##########//////////////////////////////~~///####
15           ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~     15
             ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Random Encounters: None.  (In the tabletop version, the Boss will eventually
  orchestrate attacks on the city, and personally leads one, but that never
  happens here.)

Fleeing: Your party is moved to one of: (3,11); (10,10); (2,0); (12,3).

Resting: If you rest outside an inn, and you have not yet finished the game,
  the city guard will roust you out and force you to move on or fight them.
  The inns in the southwest cost 1 platinum to stay as long as you like.

City Guards:  You will attract the attention of the city guard by any of:
  (1) resting outside of an inn;
  (2) forcing your way into Bishop Braccio's office;
  (3) entering a shop or city hall building that is closed for the night;
  (4) tavern brawling;
  (5) having the MAD MAN randomly attack citizens.
  You may get away with (1) to (3) if you've won the game.

  You will have the option to "R"un to a random location, or "S"tay and fight
  them: 2 LEVEL 3 MU (#94), 12 6TH LEVEL FIGHTER (#84), 12 AIDES (#53), and 12
  NOMAD (#40) (Morale 50, 5609 XP).  If you ever fight the city guards, all
  shops and temples will refuse service until you are rewarded for completing a
  commission.

  Some of the guards carry good magical items; once you are strong enough to
  defeat them and can be rewarded for completing a mission, you can abuse this.
  You can do this as soon as you have a significant number of characters with
  Hold Person and Stinking Cloud.  Defeating the city hall guards at location
  34 will get you a ton of good magical equipment.  Defeating the warriors and
  clerics in the Temple of Tempus is difficult without Fireball, but that nets
  you different good magical equipment and a lot of experience.

City Hall Guards: These are harder than regular city guards: 3 LEVEL 3 MU
  (#94), 6 AIDES (#53), 5 8TH LVL FIGHTER (#85), and [Party Strength] CORPORAL
  (#54) (Morale 99).   Fighting them also incurs the wrath of New Phlan; they
  will respawn after you leave the hall.

E1 [location 1] (15,1) - You are greeted here when you start the game.  Rolf
  will give you a brief guided tour, which will end at E2.  This is also where
  to depart for boat trips (boat trips do not take any time).

E2 [location 25] (0,4) - Exit to the Slums (15,4).  The guided tour also ends
  here.

  If you are carrying the Cadorna family treasure and it appears to be
  unopened, the city watch takes it from you and tells you to get the reward
  from the council clerk.

HC [location 12] (5,0) - Training Hall for clerics (costs 1000 gold).

HF [location 16] (8,0) - Training Hall for fighters (costs 1000 gold).

HM [location 13] (7,0) - Training Hall for magic-users (costs 1000 gold).

HT [location 17] (9,0) - Training Hall for thieves (costs 1000 gold).

IN [location 9] - At these inns, you can pay 1 platinum to rest as long as you
  wish without interruption.  (If you've upset the town by fighting city
  guards, you will be told you are denied service, but you can stay and rest
  anyway.)

SA [location 22] - Shop that sells weapons and armor.  You can buy all standard
  weapons and armor here.  The door at (9,14) works at night.

SG [location 19] - Shop that sells general items.  You can buy mirrors, holy
  symbols, flasks of oil, and vials of holy water.

SJ [location 21] (8,10) - Shop that sells jewelry.  Jewelry serves no purpose
  except as a weight-efficient store of wealth.

SS [location 23] - Shop that sells silver weapons and armor, and fine composite
  long bows.  Every fighter should have a fine composite long bow once you can
  afford it.

TA [location 20] - Tavern.  You can do several things here:
  (1) Get pickpocketed (chance is 26/256); the whole party loses 20% of its
      money and 5% of light items.  If you catch the pickpocket (1 in 2 chance)
      and choose to "G"rab the pickpocket, this will start a tavern brawl.
  (2) Gamble for money.  There is a 30% chance you will spin red and lose your
      money, and a 20% chance you will spin green and make a profit equal to
      your wager.  Whatever the outcome, a tavern fight cannot break out.
  (3) Listen to tavern tales, which can be any of the 23 tavern tales in the
      Adventurer's Journal.  Fewer than half of these tales have any value; the
      main ones that are useful are #1, #3, #8, and #23.  (And #9, if you are a
      fan of shattering the fourth wall.)
  (4) A tavern brawl erupts randomly (1 in 4 chance, if you did not gamble).
      This will result in outright combat (Morale 50).  To determine enemies:
      1. Roll 1d2
      2. Add +1 if Party Strength is 25 or more, or +2 if 51 or more
      3. Fight 11 of each of the three groups below starting with that number:
         1: NOMAD (#40)
         2: 1ST LVL THIEF (#45)
         3: CORPORAL (#54)
         4: AIDES (#53)
         5: 4TH LVL FIGHTER (#41)
         6: 6TH LVL THIEF (#51)
      You also get 13 allies from the above (roll 1d4 for type).  There
      probably won't be room in the combat arena for all these brawlers.

      If you win the combat, you do not get the usual items; and then city
      guards will confront you.  (What I want to know: What kind of tavern has
      potentially lethal fights breaking out every few minutes?)

2 (11,1) - Entrance to passenger dock.  This is where you select a destination
  for a boat trip:
  * Before clearing Sokal Keep: You can only travel to Sokal Keep, for free.
  * After clearing Sokal Keep: Boat travel costs 1 platinum; you may go to:
    * "S"okal Keep (8,14)
    * "E"ast to Wilderness (35,29)
    * "W"est to Wilderness (20,29)
    * North side of the "B"ay to Wilderness (26,27)

5 (10,5) - Bishop Braccio's office.  Before he requests to speak to you
  (commission #6), the city guard bars your way.  Bishop Braccio then
  introduces you to Dirten, a cleric who has sworn to cleanse the temple of
  Bane on the other side of the river, and asks you to join forces to do so.
  DIRTEN (#107) (Morale 99) can then join you as an NPC.

6 - Temple of Tyr, god of law and justice.  Standard temple services are
  available here.

  If you have the MAD MAN in your party, "An aged priest approaches, pointing
  at the mad man.  He speaks, 'That man urgently needs our care.  Drop him from
  your party or he will bring you to grief.  We will care for him.'"

7 - Temple of Sune, goddess of beauty and love.  Standard temple services are
  available here.

8 (1,0) - "You walk near the poisonous barren river."  If you have defeated
  Yarash, instead "You walk near the beautiful Stojanow River."

14 - This is where adventurers hang out.  You may do two things here:
  (1) You can have a character fight a duel.  This is always against a clone of
      your chosen character; you cannot clone equipment this way.  Lower-level
      elves with magic-user levels can do well because the cloning algorithm
      doesn't copy elven sleep/charm resistance; the Sleep spell works great
      for them.

      If the lack of effects doesn't give you an edge, you won't have great
      odds, but even so it's a quick way to get a few experience points.

  (2) You can also hire NPCs here.  There are 0...7 available, and are
      refreshed every time you re-enter the map.  (You are not required to
      reach level 2 before they appear, which the clue book claims.)
      Explanation of table:
        Pr is the probability (chance out of 48) this NPC can appear.
        Al is the NPC's alignment.  This rarely makes much difference, aside
          from evil NPCs betraying the party at the end of the game.
        Mor is the NPC's morale.  This doesn't go up with level.
        Sh is the share of money the game says the NPC will claim, plus an
          asterisk if it is said the NPC will also claim magical items.  This
          doesn't go up with level.
        AS is the share of money NPCs actually try to claim.  No NPC actually
          takes items.

      Pr  NPC               Description   Al  Mor  Sh  AS  Notable Equipment
      --  ----------------  -----------   --  ---  --  --  -----------------
       6  SWORDSMAN (#36)   L3 Fighter    LE   65  3   3
      10  WARRIOR (#103)    L2 Fighter    LE   55  1   1
       4  ACOLYTE (#108)    L1 Cleric     NG   50  1   1
       5  HERO (#109)       L4 Fighter    LE   80  4*  4   Plate Mail +1
       4  THEURGIST (#110)  L4 Magic-User TN   85  4*  7   Ring of Prot. +1
       6  ROBBER (#111)     L4 Thief      CN   70  3*  7   Leather Armor +1
       5  CURATE (#112)     L4 Cleric     LG   75  3*  7
       8  EVOKER (#122)     L2 Magic-User TN   60  2   7

24 - Temple of Tempus, god of war.  Standard temple services are available
  here.

  If you attacked any city guards and have not been forgiven, the priests are
  hostile: 'You attacked the city watch, you won't beat us so easily!'  You are
  are attacked by 12 7TH LVL CLERIC (#83), 20 4TH LVL FIGHTER (#41), and 20 8TH
  LVL FIGHTER (#85) (Morale 99); all of these enemies are unlikely to actually
  fit in the combat arena.  This battle will repeat every time you return here,
  until you mollify the city by completing a mission.

26 - Entrance to City Hall.  If Skullcrusher is with you, he will leave the
  party here: 'I must go to my master now.'

  Proclamations are posted here, depending on the number of quests you have
  completed in the quest tracker (described below):
     0: LXIV, LXXVIII, CIX, and LIX
     1: CI
     2: CXXVI and CX
     3: CXXXIV
     4: CLIV
     5: CXIV
     6: CCIV
     7: CXXIX
     8: CCI
     9: CXIV
    10: LIX

27 (4,4) - If you opened the Cadorna family treasure in an obvious way,
  "Councilman Cadorna confronts you.  'You have taken my family treasure.  I
  don't forget such things.'  He strides off."

29 (5,5) - Council clerk's office.  In later games, she gets the name of Sasha.
  You may receive commissions and be rewarded for completing them here.  In
  most cases, you do not actually need to be told of the mission to perform and
  be rewarded for it.  If Sasha rewards you for completing a commission, that
  will usually remove any anger caused by fighting the city guard.

  The available commissions are the first three unresolved missions from this
  list:
  (1) Clear the slums immediately west of the Civilized Area.  Reward: 1
      jewelry, 50 platinum, 250 gold (450 XP).
  (2) Clear Sokal Keep of its spectral guardians.  Reward: 3 jewelry, 250
      platinum (1308 XP).
  (3) Return books, maps, and tomes with useful information.  This is resolved
      once you clear Mendor's Library (defeat the basilisk and spectre), not
      when you actually return all the books of interest.  Reward: 200
      platinum, 250 gold (208 XP).  (In some versions of the game, you can
      never resolve this mission.  I haven't had a problem with v1.3, but have
      with v1.0.)
  (4) Discover what item is to be auctioned in Podal Plaza.  This mission
      cannot be performed until it is offered.  If you get close enough for the
      auction to begin, that is enough; you do not need to actually discover
      what the item is.  Reward: 200 platinum, 250 gold (208 XP).  (If you make
      a mistake, this mission may be permanently unresolvable.)
  (5) Speak to Junior Councilman Porphyrys Cadorna, who has a mission; you
      must resolve commission #2 to be asked this.  Reward: 20 gems (833 XP).
  (6) Speak to Bishop Braccio, who has a mission (only asked once).  Completing
      that mission will be recognized here, but your only reward is praise and
      getting to keep any items you found in the temple; it will also not
      negate any anger caused by fighting the city guard, unlike all the other
      missions here.
  (7) Clear old Kovel Mansion of the thieves that operate there; you must
      resolve commission #2 to be asked this.  Reward: 3 gems, 80 platinum (191
      XP).
  (8) Prevent the nomads from joining forces with Phlan's enemies.  Reward: 2
      jewelry, 6 gems (983 XP).
  (9) Prevent the kobolds from joining forces with Phlan's enemies.  Reward: 25
      gems (1041 XP).
  (10) Find the source of the Stojanow River's pollution and end it.  Reward:
      15 jewelry, 250 platinum (5708 XP).
  (11) Prevent the lizardmen from joining forces with Phlan's enemies.  Reward:
      5 jewelry, 15 gems, 50 gold (2466 XP).
  (12) Rescue the heir to the house of Bivant; this mission cannot be performed
      until it is offered, and you cannot receive it if commission #2 has not
      been resolved.  Reward: 5 jewelry, 25 gems, Two-Handed Sword +1, +3 Vs.
      Undead and 4 Clerical Scroll (Restoration, Restoration) (3208 XP).  If
      you instead failed the mission, the clerk complains 'By the way, your
      bungling the Bivant rescue has cost us.'
  (13) Go on a diplomatic mission to the Zhentil Keep Outpost to the west.
      This mission cannot be performed until it is offered, which requires
      commission #5 to be resolved.  You will either first be asked to speak
      to Senior Councilman Porphyrys Cadorna by going through the south door,
      or be given the mission directly if you have learned that Cadorna is a
      traitor by visiting Valjevo Castle 26.  Reward: 5 jewelry, 7 gems (2125
      XP); and if you have not already learned it, you are told that Porphyrys
      Cadorna is a traitor to New Phlan.  (You are also told he has a bounty
      upon his head, but none is actually paid.)
  (14) If you have resolved commission #13: Visit Head Councilman Urslingen,
      through the south door of Cadorna's old office, where he will ask you to
      capture Stojanow Gate.  Reward: 10 jewelry (3666 XP).  After this, the
      next logical step is:
  (15) If you have resolved commission #14: Visit the council chambers, where
      you are asked to lead the assault on Valjevo Castle and defeat
      Tyranthraxus, which wins the game.  Reward: 100 jewelry, 200 gems (45000
      XP).

  The council clerk will eventually offer a special quest, if your party has
  Party Strength of at least 19 and has completed at least 4 quests in the
  quest tracker (described below).
  * If Party Strength is 19...36: You are asked to clear the undead from
    Valhingen Graveyard.
  * If Party Strength is at least 37: You are offered a formal commission to
    clear the graveyard.  If you accept, you receive: Two-Handed Sword +1, +3
    Vs. Undead and 4 Clerical Scroll (Restoration, Restoration) (333 XP).
  You will receive rewards for defeating undead in the graveyard (the kill
  scores are described in the Valhingen Graveyard section):
  * 1 gold    : each new point of Skeleton Kill Score
  * 1 platinum: each new point of Zombie Kill Score
                1 for the juju zombie at Valhingen Graveyard 8
  * 1 gem     : each new point of Wight Kill Score
                1 for the giant skeleton at Valhingen Graveyard 5
  * 1 jewelry : each new point of Spectre Kill Score
                1 for the wraith at Valhingen Graveyard 12
  The final reward for clearing the graveyard is: 25 jewelry, 15 gems (9791
  XP).

  The council clerk also offers these other rewards:
  (1) Defeat Norris the Gray.  Reward: 200 platinum, 250 gold (208 XP).
  (2) Retrieve specific books from Mendor's Library:
      (a) Fyerdetha's Discourses on Power.  Reward: 80 platinum (66 XP).
      (b) Urgund's Description of Darkness.  Reward: 90 platinum (75 XP).
      (c) The Grand Historian's Records of the Arts of War.  Reward: 120
          platinum (100 XP).
      (d) The History of the North.  Reward: 110 platinum (91 XP).
      (e) Lex Geographica.  Reward: 100 platinum (83 XP).
      (f) The first of any of the other books from the library.  Reward: 1
          gold (0 XP).
  (3) Clear Podal Plaza.  You cannot do this if commission #4 has been offered
      but not resolved.  Reward: 200 platinum, 250 gold (208 XP).
  (4) Clear the Cadorna Textile House.  Reward: 200 platinum, 250 gold (208
      XP).
  (5) Clear the Wealthy Area.  Reward: 3 gems, 99 platinum, 250 gold (249 XP).

  The ten quests that advance the quest tracker are:
  (1) Commission #1 (clear the slums)
  (2) Commission #2 (clear Sokal Keep)
  (3) Commission #4 (auction in Podal Plaza)
  (4) Commission #7 (clear thieves from Kovel Mansion)
  (5) Commission #8 (prevent nomads from joining Tyranthraxus)
  (6) Commission #9 (prevent kobolds from joining Tyranthraxus)
  (7) Commission #10 (end pollution of the Stojanow River)
  (8) Commission #11 (prevent lizardmen from joining Tyranthraxus)
  (9) Clear Valhingen Graveyard
  (10) Defeat Norris the Gray

30 (6,5) - Junior Councilman's office.  Before you get commission #5, the city
  hall guard bars your way.  Then Junior Councilman Porphyrys Cadorna gives you
  a mission: 'When old Phlan was overrun, a family treasure was hidden in the
  western building of the textile complex.  The faithful servant sent to fetch
  it never returned.  The complex is just south of Podal Plaza.  Bring the
  treasure to me and you will be well rewarded.'

31 (5,6) - Senior Councilman's office.  Before you get commission #13, the city
  hall guard bars your way.  Then, if you have not uncovered him as a traitor,
  now-Senior Councilman Porphyrys Cadorna gives you a mission: 'It is
  imperative that a message be delivered to the Zhentil outpost to the west.  I
  am sending you as diplomatic envoys.  When you get to Zhentil Keep, present
  this packet to its commandant.  Do not break the seals or you will be seized
  as spies.'

  (You are unable to actually open the packet, unlike in the tabletop version.)

32 - Head councilman's office.  Nothing happens here until you are rewarded for
  completing commission #13 and you are asked to visit here.  Then Werner von
  Urslingen gives you a mission: 'Thank you for coming.  I must be brief for
  our need is urgent.  Our one chance to defeat the enemy is through an assault
  on the castle.  To do this, we must first secure Stojanow Gate.  The gate is
  too strong to be taken by storm.  A small band must slip inside and hold
  until relieved.  You are the best and the bravest.  The council has
  instructed me to entrust the task to you.'

33 - City council chambers.  Nothing happens here until you are rewarded for
  completing commission #14 and you are asked to visit here.  "In the council
  chambers, the entire city council is waiting for you.  The Lord High Mayor,
  Ulrich Eberhard, speaks: 'Our forces are marshalled for the assault on
  Valjevo Castle.  It is the unanimous request of the council that you lead
  the attack.  Your skill and bravery have won the admiration of all Phlan.  We
  look to you to help us win our freedom.'"

34 (4,6) - The city hall guards bar you from passing here.

SECTION 6.3.1 - Slums Overview
------------------------------

Plot background:

The Slums, just to the west of the fortified walls of New Phlan, are infested
with monsters.  It mostly serves as a straightforward search-and-destroy
mission to ease into the game.

Strategy:

You need to fight many combats to clear the Slums; there is no way around
fighting 15 random combats.  All but one set combat are easy to win with the
help of Sleep spells cast in the midst of clumps of monsters.  Be sure to
collect the treasure at locations 5, 12, and 16 as well.

The ogre/troll combat in the southwest can be tackled with low-level
characters, but is generally worth skipping until you've gained strength
elsewhere.

SECTION 6.3.2 - Slums Details
-----------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 20
   #################################################
 0 #12~        #        + 6   #     #        #     #  0  KEY:
   ####  #++#++#        #     #     #        #     #
 1 #     #  #11#        #     #    2#       1+     #  1  # wall
   #++####  ####  ################++##########     #     ~ illusionary wall
 2 #10#           + 5  5#     +     +        +     #  2  + door/archway
   #  #  #######++####++#     ####++#######  #     #
 3 #  #  #    9#  #     +     #           #  #     #  3  E Entrance/exit
   ####  ####++#  #     #     #           #  #######
 4 +E2      #     +     #     #           #  #   E1+  4
   #######  #++#  ##########++#++##########++#++####
 5 #  +14#  # 8#           #  #     #        #     #  5
   #  ####  ####     #######  #     #        #     #
 6 #  #     +        #     #  #     #        #     #  6
   #  ####++##########     #  #     #        #     #
 7 #13#        #     +     +  #     #        +     #  7
   #++#        #     ####  ####++###################
 8 #  +    7   +        #  #  #                    #  8
   #  #        #######  ####  #     ##########     #
 9 #  #        #     #        #     #        #     #  9
   #  ####++####     #        #     #        #     #
10 #        #  + 16  #E3      #     #       3+     # 10
   #        #  #     #++############################
11 +E2      +15#     #     #           #           # 11
   ###################  #############  #++#++#++####
12 #     #              #        #  +  +  #  #  +19# 12
   ####  #  ##########  #     #++#  ####  #  #  ####
13 #  #  #  #        #  #     #  #  +  #  #  +     # 13
   #  #++#++#++#  #++#  ####++#++#  ####  #  #     #
14 #20#        #  #           #        #  +  #     # 14
   #++#  ####++#  ##########++#######++#  #  #######
15 #     #              #     #           #        # 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Random encounters: There are a total of 15 random encounters in the Slums.

  The chance of a random encounter is determined as follows:
                               Outside Rope Guild   Inside Rope Guild
                               ------------------   -----------------
  Base Probability                        1 in 14             2 in 11
  If in Search Mode                   add 4 in 14         add 2 in 11
  If gypsy at location 8 killed       add 5 in 14         add 3 in 11

  The number of base monsters in a random encounter is calculated from Party
  Strength:                       Outside Rope Guild   Inside Rope Guild
                                  ------------------   -----------------
  Normal number of monsters       [Party Str] * 2/3    [Party Str]
  If gypsy at location 8 killed   add 5                add 10

  The encounters are composed of one the following (equal probability):
                  Base Number  Leaders
    Base Monster  For Leaders  (+5 Morale if present)  Movement
    ------------  -----------  ----------------------  --------
    KOBOLD (#0)             8  3 KOBOLD LEADER (#1)           6
    GOBLIN GUARD (#2)       8  4 GOBLIN LEADER (#3)           6
    ORC (#4)               14  4 ORC LEADER (#5)              9

  1 BUGBEAR (#63) will lead the monsters (+15 Morale) if the number of base
  monsters is 19 or higher.

  Surprise is rolled for the party and the monsters; the monsters start at
  Distance 2 unless both sides are surprised.  You get the standard options of
  "C"ombat, "W"ait, "F"lee, "A"dvance/"P"arley:
  * Party and monsters both not surprised:
    * 50% chance: the monsters are "angry" (base Morale 60); "W"ait or "P"arley
      always result in combat.  "F"lee success depends on the movement of the
      slowest party member compared to the monsters.
    * 50% chance: the monsters are "seedy-looking" (base Morale 40); "W"ait
      always causes the monsters to flee.
  * Party surprised, monsters not: the monsters immediately attack (base Morale
    70).
  * Party not surprised, monsters surprised: "W"ait always causes the monsters
    (base Morale 30) to flee.
  * Party and monsters both surprised: "You bump into" each other; "W"ait
    always causes the monsters (base Morale 50) to flee.

  To determine the result of a "P"arley that did not immediately result in
  combat, begin with the appropriate number from this table:

                ------------ Parley Style -------------
  Base Number   Haughty     Sly    Nice    Meek Abusive
  -----------   ---------------------------------------
  8 or less           9      19      19      19      29
  9...15              4      14      14       9      24
  16 or more         -1       9       9      -1      14

  Add 1d31, and also the current character's Charisma reaction modifier; then
  if the score is:
  * 65 or less: the monsters attack with a +20 bonus to Morale.
  * 65...74: the monsters attack.
  * 75...85: "The monsters respond, 'Da boss don't like youse guys.  Give us
    sumptin an maybe we'll ferget we seen yas.'"
    * "P"ay: This only works if your offer in gold numerically at least equals
      this random encounter's strength, and you then lose half your remaining
      money anyway.
    * "S"urrender: Your party loses all of its money and light items, and some
      heavier items.
    * "R"un: Success depends on the party member with the lowest movement
       compared with the monsters' movement.
    * "F"ight: Starts combat.
  * 86...95: "The leader speaks, 'The boss don't allow your kind in his
    territory.  Leave now or we'll have to run you in.'"
    * "F"ight or "S"tay: Starts combat.
    * "L"eave: Always works; party stays on current square.
    * "R"un: Always works; party moves to another location as "F"lee.
  * 96 or more: "'Let me give you a piece of advice,' their leader says.  'Stay
    away from the textile house.  The undead are going crazy up there.'  The
    monsters turn to leave."
    * "L"et them go: Always works; party stays on current square.
    * "S"top them: Starts combat.

  Once all 15 random encounters have been defeated in combat, they will never
  again occur here.

Fleeing: Your party is moved to one of: (15,4); (14,6); (11,5); (11,2); (9,2).

Resting: You may safely rest either in a room where you have defeated a set
  encounter, or anywhere if you have cleared the block.  It is not safe if you
  have killed the gypsy at location 8.

  If you are interrupted (if possible, the chance is 24% every 2 hours) it will
  be by the same monsters as for a random encounter.  This can happen even if
  you have killed all the actual random encounters.

Clearing the block: To clear the Slums, you are supposed to do all of:
  * defeat all 15 random encounters
  * defeat all 9 set encounters, at locations 1, 2, 6, 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, and
    20
  * deal with Ohlo at location 3, by either doing his quest or killing him
  All the above adds up to the required 25 clear points.

  If you get interrupted while resting, the game script does not actually check
  if there is a random encounter available, so you can get one even if there
  are none left.  If you defeat such an encounter, you will be credited with a
  clear point, which lets you clear the block without defeating all the set
  encounters or dealing with Ohlo; this is a scripting bug.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The tabletop adventure Slums have
  already more or less been cleaned out.

E1 (15,4) - Exit to Civilized Area (0,4).  If you get text saying that you hear
  an alarm, then the block has not yet been cleared.

E2 - Exit to Kuto's Well.

E3 [location 17] (6,10) - Entrance to the Old Rope Guild.  In this part of the
  map, the automap does does not work, and random encounters are more frequent
  and difficult.

1 (13,1) - "Several orcs are arguing over some papers."  Fight 1 ORC (#13) and
  3 ORC (#4) (Morale 99, 77 XP).  The papers include a Clerical Scroll (Cure
  Light Wounds, Cure Light Wounds).

2 (10,1) - "A healthy-looking goblin is instructing a group of young warriors.
  He smiles and says, 'I see our opponents have arrived.'"  Fight 1 GOBLIN
  LEADER (#12) and 8 GOBLIN GUARD (#2) (Morale 60, 90 XP).  Among the loot is
  Leather Armor +1.

3 (13,10) - The magic-user Ohlo is here.  "You burst into an elegantly paneled
  room.  A small man sits hunched over a table by the east wall.  He sets down
  his pen and gazes sternly at you.  'Well?', he demands."
  * "A"ttack, or parley with "H"aughty or "A"busive: "'You presume too much,'
    the man says quietly.  He gestures."  Fight 1 LEVEL 3 MU (#94), 2 ORC
    LEADER (#5), 8 ORC (#4), 25 HOBGOBLIN (#6) (Morale 99, Distance 1).
  * Parley with "N"ice or "M"eek: 'I may have a use for you.  Some time ago, I
    ordered a special potion.  The potion is ready but I can't leave to fetch
    it.  Bring it here, I pay well.'  If you "A"ccept the commission, 'It waits
    in a booth in the old rope guild but a short distance to the southeast from
    where you now stand.  Speak my name, Ohlo.'

  After you return with the potion from location 19:
  * "A"sk for more money, or "R"efuse to give it to him, causes him to attack
    you as above.
  * "G"ive him the potion: "The man takes the potion and gulps it greedily.
    As you watch, he seems to grow younger and stronger.  'Excellent,' he
    smacks, 'your reward.'"  The reward is 1 jewelry, 150 platinum, and 1
    random magical item (558-891 XP).

    There are not many places in the game where you can find random magical
    items, and there are some very good items you can only get as a roll for a
    random magical item, so if you are patient you can try rolling for
    something good.

5 - "You have entered a very unclean stable.  There is evidence that a large
  and untidy animal had lived here."  Searching this room yields a leather bag
  containing 2 gems, 100 gold, 20 Arrows +1, and a Short Bow +1 (233 XP).

6 (7,0) - "You interrupt some feeding kobolds."  Fight 1 KOBOLD LEADER (#11)
  and 15 KOBOLD (#0) (Morale 60, 289 XP).  The leader carries Bracers AC 6.

7 - If the block has not yet been cleared, you can hear skulking monsters drop
  hints about other places:
  * '... the gang is operating from the catacombs by the well ...'
  * '... the temple over the river is run by some hot-shot orc ...'
  * '... there is a secret treasure room in the NW corner ...'

8 (3,5) - A gypsy lives here.  You can either have her tell your fortune, or
  attack her, which automatically kills her and gets you 3 copper, but makes
  random combats in the Slums more frequent and difficult.  (If you want to be
  a murderhobo, there are far more effective ways of being one.)  The three
  fortunes you can receive depend on how far in the game you have gotten:
  * 'Blood and violence are writ boldly in your future.  Look for friends where
    you expect enemies and enemies where you expect allies.'
  * 'A powerful one becomes aware of your deeds and seeks to destroy you.  A
    weak one sees you as a path to power.'
  * 'The time is nigh when the paths you have trod will empty and you must seek
    new ways.  The riddle's answer is great evil using great good for great
    evil.'

9 (3,3) - "A large orc raises his head and snarls, 'How dare you break into our
  home?'"  Fight 1 ORC LEADER (#15), 3 ORC LEADER (#14), and 16 ORC (#4)
  (Morale 70, 412 XP).  The loot includes 3 Broad Swords +1, a Chain Mail +1,
  and a Flail +1.

10 (0,2) - "Some hobgoblins are arguing over a pile of gold.  'Thieves!' they
  scream when they see you."  Fight 5 HOBGOBLIN (#6) (Morale 75).  After
  combat, you can search to find their treasure (258 XP): 50 platinum, 500
  gold, Ring of Protection +1, Short Bow +1.

11 (3,1) - "You have entered a small storage room."

12 (0,0) - If you search this secret room, "You have stumbled into a treasure
  room."  You find 2 jewelry, 4 gems, 50 platinum, 92 gold, 1000 electrum, 20
  Arrows +1, and Short Bow +1 (1173 XP).

13 (0,7) - "Guards run to intercept you."  Fight 2 ORC LEADER (#5) and 30 ORC
  (#4) (Morale 60, 99 XP).

14 (1,5) - "You intrude on a gathering of monster leaders."  Fight 1 OGRE (#8),
  2 GNOLL (#73), and 2 HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7) (Morale 80, Distance 1, 63 XP).

15 (3,11) - "You have alerted the guards."  Fight 11 GOBLIN LEADER (#3) and 12
  GOBLIN GUARD (#2) (Morale 60, 65 XP).

16 - "This large room is apparently empty."  But if you search, you find the
  goblins' treasure: 2 gems, 200 platinum, Shield +1, Magic-User Scroll (Magic
  Missile) (383 XP).

19 (15,12) - A merchant apologizes that he has nothing.  "A"ttacking him
  results in combat with 8 HOBGOBLIN (#6) (Morale 99), which causes the
  merchant to disappear for good (though this still counts as dealing with Ohlo
  for clearing the block).  If you "S"peak and give the name of OHLO, he gives
  you a package (which is not an inventory item).

20 (0,14) - "Some monsters are tossing a sack of grain.  When the sack breaks
  they wail, 'Oh, no!  What can we throw now?'  One looks your way.  'I know,'
  he says."  Fight 4 TROLL (#31) and 2 OGRE (#8) (Morale 75, 1222-2222 XP)
  carrying 1 jewelry, 50 platinum, 40 gold, and 3 random magical items.

  This can be won even if all you've done is clear the rest of the Slums.  Cast
  Bless before engaging.  The Sleep spell can knock out an ogre; knock out both
  ogres this way.  Let the sleeping ogres bar the way of the trolls in the back
  while you focus fire on the troll in front; your primary cleric should stand
  behind to cast cure spells as needed.  Once the front troll is down, stand on
  its body so it can't revive.  Then step away from the ogre on the left and
  slay it with an arrow.  The other ogre's sleeping body is enough to block the
  other three trolls from reaching you.  Pick off the trolls in the back with
  bows and arrows; avoid focusing fire, as you don't want an unconscious troll
  to rise with full hit points.  You may need to refresh the Sleep spell on the
  remaining ogre as you are doing this.  With 4-5 fighters and thieves firing
  arrows, it shouldn't take long to knock out the trolls in the back.

  If your party is weak enough that the above isn't enough to win, you can
  return later, after one of your magic-users learns Stinking Cloud.  It may be
  worth delaying this fight anyway, since 3 random magical items is an
  opportunity that doesn't arise again for a long time, and you might want to
  wait until you can easily win this battle to reroll the treasure at your
  leisure.

  If you are willing to exploit bugs, there are two alternative means of
  bypassing this combat:
  * You can also get clear points by repeatedly resting and being disturbed in
    an unsafe area.
  * You can run away from the combat, as the game script doesn't check to see
    if you ran away before crediting you with victory.  This is tricky to pull
    off since trolls have movement 12.

SECTION 6.4.1 - Sokal Keep Overview
-----------------------------------

Plot background:

Sokal Keep, last bastion of humanity when Phlan fell decades ago, is now
haunted by undead that serve neither New Phlan nor the Boss.  Spirits disrupt
shipping to and from New Phlan, so it would be beneficial for New Phlan to
somehow get rid of them.  It is in the interest of the Boss to prevent this.

Strategy:

Visiting location 1, a few squares from the start, gives you the passwords
needed to communicate with the undead.  Retrieve the treasures at location 15,
16, and 17, going around the large orc/hobgoblin ambush at location 9.

The poisonous frogs and huge scorpions have lethal poison attacks, which can be
fixed with the Neutralize Poison at one of the temples back in Phlan.

The ambush at location 9 is another combat difficult for low-level characters
you may want to defer, but it is required to complete the mission.

SECTION 6.4.2 - Sokal Keep Details
----------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 21
   #################################################
 0 #####################################17 14   +  #  0  KEY:
   #####################################        ####
 1 #####################################14       13#  1  # wall
   ##############################################~~#     ~ illusionary wall
 2 #           #        +     +        +10         #  2  + door/archway
   #           #        #     #        #           #
 3 #           #    7   #     #        #           #  3  E Entrance/exit
   ####        #        #     #        #        #++#
 4 ####        #16      # 9  9#        #        #  #  4
   ####     #############     #############     ####
 5 #        ####        + 9  9+        ####   10   #  5
   ####++#######        #++#++#        #######++####
 6 #        #           #11 11#           #    6 15#  6
   #        #        ####     ####        #        #
 7 #        #        #  #     #  #        + 6      #  7
   ####  #######     #~~#     #~~#     #######  ####
 8 ####  + 5   #     #           #     #######  ####  8
   ####  #     #     #  #######  #     #############
 9 ####  #     #     #           #     #######  ####  9
   ####  #######     #~~#     #~~#     #######  ####
10 #        #        #  #12 12#  #        + 4      # 10
   #        #        #############        #        #
11 #       8#                             #        # 11
   #######++####  ####           ####  #############
12 ####        +  ####           ####  +        #### 12
   ####        ##########+++++##########        ####
13 #              #### 1  2  2   ####              # 13
   #              ####           ####              #
14 #                 #           #                 # 14
   ####  #######  ####           ####  #######  ####
15 ####  #######  ####   E1 E1   ####  #######  #### 15
   ######################+++++######################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Regenerating encounters: Some fixed encounters may happen again if you leave
  and return.  Fixed encounters that may only happen once ever are marked with
  an asterisk.

Random encounters: In the courtyard around the inner keep, the chance of a
  random encounter is 1 in 6, with no surprise possible.  The patrols will
  leave you alone if you "P"arley (attitude does not matter) and say 'SHESTNI'
  before you have completed the mission, or 'SAMOSUD' after you have completed
  the mission.

  "C"ombat or giving the wrong word starts combat with 6 SKELETON (#34) and 6
  ZOMBIE (#35) (Morale 99, 59 XP).  If you defeat 4 such patrols in combat, you
  will encounter no more patrols during the current visit.  If you leave the
  Keep, the patrols return to full strength, even if Ferran Martinez has been
  dealt with.

Fleeing: Your party is moved to one of: (4,11); (7,l4); (8,11); (8,13).

Resting: You may safely rest anywhere if the four undead patrols have been
  defeated in combat.  Otherwise, there is a 1% chance every 10 minutes rest is
  disturbed by one of the patrols.

Clearing the block: Once the spectral Ferran Martinez at location 12 has either
  been told the truth about Phlan being reclaimed, or has been defeated in
  combat, the spirits will dissipate and no longer disrupt shipping.  (The
  undead patrols can never be permanently eliminated.)

Differences from the tabletop adventure: "Sokol" Keep doesn't have the de facto
  copy protection on the elf skeleton, and has a different layout with added
  green slime and ochre jelly, but many of the other details are the same.  The
  undead patrols are supposed to help the party against the orc/hobgoblin
  ambush.

E1 - Exit to Civilized Area (15,1), via boat.

1 (6,13) - "The skeleton of a long-dead elf lies hidden by rocks and reeds
  Its weapons and equipment are badly rusted and corroded by salt, its leathers
  are warm eaten and crusted in dirt."  If you "S"earch, you find a parchment
  with Espruar runes reading 'LUX', 'SHESTNI', and 'SAMOSUD'.

  (There's nothing in-game I know of to hint at which word is which, other than
  their Latin or Russian meanings in real life.)

2 - "You stand below the rotting remains of the once-mighty gates of Sokal
  Keep."  If you have not yet dealt with Ferran Martinez, "Echoing footsteps
  are dimly heard within the keep.  To the west rises a mound of reeds."

4 (13,10) - "Unwholesome mold and fungi cover the decaying ruins of the keep's
  stable.  A putrid smell of sickness rises as you enter the building."

5 (2,8) - You can't do anything with the fungus in this room.  (You can eat it
  for a temporary buff in the tabletop version, though I'm not sure who would
  want to try eating fungus growing in a haunted keep.)

6 - 4 POISONOUS FROG (#38) (Morale 50, Distance 2, 26 XP) live in this former
  blacksmith's shop, and will attack if they notice you.  They have lethal
  poison attacks, though you get a +4 bonus to saving throws.

7 - "This building is filled with broken and splintered wood, the remains of
  the bunks and chests of the original defenders.  It seems everything has been
  well looted."  The spectres of the keep's original defenders haunt here.

  They cannot be successfully attacked, nor will they attack you.  Parleying
  only has an effect if you speak the word 'LUX': "The haunts burst into a
  chorus of howls, moans, complaints, wails, and other lamentations over their
  fate and the fate of their families.  They were the original defenders of the
  keep, before the cleric's spells inadvertently bound them to this place.  One
  spirit's voice rises above the rest, 'An account of our trials is within the
  diary.'  He points to a floorboard."

8 (2,11) - "The interior is overrun with insects.  At your footstep, they fall
  from the walls and ceiling."  Fight 2 HUGE SCORPION (#39) (Morale 99, 63 XP).
  They have lethal poison attacks.

9* - The first time you enter one of these four squares, "A loud commotion
  rises from the courtyard.  Bashing open the door, a large force of orcs and
  hobgoblins rushes you."  Fight 4 ORC LEADER (#5), 15 HOBGOBLIN (#6), and 31
  ORC (#4) (Morale 50, Distance 1, 187 XP) attacks you.  On the corpse of one
  of the hobgoblins, you find a note (Journal Entry 57).

  You get the best tactical positioning if you enter through the southeastern
  door.  Cast Bless before entering.  There is a 3-square-tall choke point
  behind where your characters start; retreat there even if it means turning
  your back to a few orcs.  Form a defensive line behind the choke point and
  let the horde come to you.  Only the orc leaders can actually launch ranged
  attacks, and they run out of arrows in 4 rounds, so don't worry about taking
  too many arrow attacks.  Once the horde comes close you can launch Sleep and
  Hold Person spells and pick off disabled foes.  If you kill half the horde,
  it will start checking morale.

  If you still have trouble, it helps to hire 2 heroes in the New Phlan
  training hall just for this one battle.

10 - "You enter the keep's old armory.  All of the weapons and armor have
  decayed into uselessness."

11 - "This was once the chapel of the keep.  Inside the doorway are the dried
  husks of two orcs, their faces twisted with terror.  A large altar dominates
  the southern wall."

12 - Altar of the central chapel.  A less-scary-than-usual spectre will
  confront the party.

  You can fight FERRAN MARTINEZ (#19) (Morale 99, 338 XP), who is alone, to
  successfully complete the mission, but he is a very dangerous level-draining
  undead.

  It is easier to parley with him, say 'LUX', then "T"ell the truth, which is
  the only way to get a response out of him: 'The city fell long ago to the
  unblessed creatures imbued with the might of a magical pool.  Chief among
  these were Tyranthraxus, Edranka, and Torath.  With their powers they ruled
  and united all else, driving forward to destroy us all.  The sage Mendor
  worked hard to gather record of all these things, but they are lost now, his
  library overrun.'  If you haven't yet taken it, he tells you here about the
  treasure at location 17.  'To pass my guards on the way out, speak the word
  'SAMOSUD'.  Now we are freed, our duty done!'  Ferran fades away; this will
  also complete the mission.

  (If you say the wrong word, you can reset Ferran by leaving and re-entering
  Sokal Keep.)

13 (15,1) - "Passing through an illusionary wall, you enter a portion of the
  keep that remains untouched by time or ravaging armies."  If you have not yet
  taken the treasure at location 17, "There is a glow in the northwestern
  corner of the room."

14 - If you have not yet taken the treasure at location 17, "Special stands in
  the northwestern corner hold equipment."

15* (15,6) - If you search here, "As you search through the wrecked smithy, you
  find that time has crumbled everything with the exception of one old hammer."
  You may take the Hammer +1 (66 XP).

16* (4,4) - If you search here, you find the defenders' diary (Journal Entry 3)
  plus 5 gems (208 XP).  (If the spectral defenders did not tell you to look
  here, searching only has a 10% chance of success.)

17* (12,0) - Hidden in the corner behind an illusionary wall in the armory are
  surviving magical weaponry and armor: Shield +1, Long Sword +1, Chain Mail
  +1, Mace +2 (333 XP).

SECTION 6.5.1 - Kuto's Well Overview
------------------------------------

Plot background:

Kuto's Well is the most prominent source of fresh water within Phlan, so many
of the current resident monsters visit it frequently.  The area is, among
monsters, something of a neutral zone.  Your party is not seen as neutral,
though.  Also, the bandit Norris the Gray hides out here and doesn't tolerate
attempts to find or enter his hideout.

Strategy:

While you are never asked to come here, this is a good place to explore if you
cannot yet handle the ogre/troll combat in the Slums or the large orc/hobgoblin
ambush in Sokal Keep.  You can defeat all 10 random combats to create a
monster-free zone and get a council reward; also get the treasure at location
22.

SECTION 6.5.2 - Kuto's Well Details
-----------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 29
   #################################################
 0 ####   20   +  #     '     # 20  '  #     #     #  0  KEY:
   #############  #     # 20  #''''''  #     #     #
 1 #  +20         ' 20  #     #        #     #     #  1  # wall
   #  ##########  #     #++#######     ####++####++#     ' rubbled wall
 2 #     #     #  #     #  ' 20  +        #     #  #  2  + door/archway
   #     # 20  #  ####++#  ''''''#        #     #  #
 3 #     #     +        #                 #     #  #  3  E Entrance/exit
   #############     #############        #++####++#
 4 +E2              4# 3  3  3  3# 4  4          E1+  4
   #############     ####''#######''#######  #######
 5 #     +     +       4' 4  4  4  4+ 3  4#  #     #  5
   #     #     #'''     '''         #     #  #     #
 6 #     +     +  '       2        4# 3  4#  +     #  6
   #############  '     #++#        #     ##########
 7 #     + 3# 4        2+E4+ 2     4+ 3  4#        #  7
   #     #  #           #++#     '''#######        #
 8 #     + 3+ 4           2        4  4   #        #  8
   #############++#++#  ''''     #######  #++#     #
 9 #     #     +     +  '20'    4# 3   #     #     #  9
   #++#######  #++#++#  ''''  #++#     #     #######
10 #  +     #                4+ 3  3   #           # 10
   #++#     #     #######++#######     #     ''''  #
11 +E2#     +     #     #  #     #     #     '  'E1+ 11
   #++#     #     #     #  #     #######     ''''''#
12 #  #     #     #     +  +     #              +  # 12
   #++#######     #######++#######              #++#
13 #  #           #      21      #              #  # 13
   #++#  #######  #  ####++####  #     #++#######  #
14 #  #  #     #  #  #   22   #  #     #  #        # 14
   #  #++#     #  #  #        #  #     #  #        #
15 #     +     +E3#  #        #  #   E3#  #        # 15
   #############++###################++#############
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Random encounters: There are 10 random encounters around Kuto's Well; the
  chance of a random encounter 1 in 11, or 3 in 11 if you are in Search Mode.

  The monsters (equal probability of the below) default to a base number equal
  to Party Strength:                                        Base
    Base Monster    Modifier                              Morale  Movement
    ------------    ------------------------------------  ------  --------
    KOBOLD (#0)     also 3 KOBOLD LEADER (#1)                 50         6
    LIZARDMAN (#57) divide number by 8 (minimum 1)            90        12
    GNOLL (#73)     divide number by 6 (minimum 1)            75         9

  Surprise is rolled for; the monsters start at Distance 2 unless both sides
  are surprised.  You get the standard options of "C"ombat, "W"ait, "F"lee,
  "A"dvance/"P"arley:
  * Party and monsters both not surprised:
    * 50% chance: the monsters are "bloodthirsty" (+9 bonus to Morale);
      "W"ait or "P"arley always result in combat.  "F"lee success depends on
      the movement of the slowest party member compared to the monsters.
    * 50% chance: "You are being avoided" by the monsters (-10 penalty to
      Morale); "W"ait causes the monsters to flee.
  * Party surprised, monsters not surprised: the monsters immediately attack.
  * Party not surprised, monsters surprised: "W"ait causes the monsters (-20
    penalty to Morale) to flee.
  * Party and monsters both surprised: "You are suddenly face to face" with
    each other.  "W"ait causes the monsters to flee.

  If you "P"arley, and it doesn't immediately result in combat, add the
  following together:
    * 9 for "H"aughty; 19 for "S"ly, "N"ice, or "M"eek; 29 for "A"busive
    * 1d31
    * The current character's Charisma reaction modifier
  If the result is:
  * Less than 65: You offend the monsters, and they attack (Morale 99).
  * 65...94: You offend the monsters, and they attack (Morale as above).
  * 95 or more: "'We have to keep this area free of intruders -- Boss's orders.
    We'll let you go this time.  But if you come back, you'll face big
    trouble.'  The monsters leave."

  Once all 10 random encounters have been defeated in combat, they will never
  occur again here.

Fleeing: Your party is moved to one of: (13,12); (2,9); (11,3); (1,1); (13,7);
 (1,14); (10,13); (6,5).

Resting: You cannot safely rest here until you have defeated all 10 random
  encounters; defeating Norris the Gray does not affect this, contrary to what
  the clue book claims.  If rest is not safe, every hour there is a 12% chance
  you are disturbed by a random encounter, in which both you and monsters are
  surprised.  (The monsters being surprised is a bug.)

Clearing the block: There is no reward or recognition for clearing this block,
  other than making resting here safe.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The map layout is similar but not
  quite the same; the hag and her treasure only exist in the Gold Box version.

E1 - Exit to the Slums.

E2 - Exit to Podal Plaza.

E3 - Exit to Mendor's Library.

E4 [location 1] (7,7) - Kuto's Well; entrance to Kuto's Well Catacombs (7,7).

2/3/4 - Some of Norris the Gray's kobolds patrol the well and the buildings
  near it, to prevent anyone from entering his hideout.  Attack is automatic if
  you try to enter the well.  It is likely if you enter one of the buildings
  near the well, at 3; and also sometimes happens at 2 or 4 (always if you
  search).

  If they attack, you fight 6 KOBOLD (#0) and 3 KOBOLD LEADER (#1) (Morale 67,
  16 XP); a second identical combat ensues immediately afterward as
  reinforcements emerge from the well.

20 - In one of these rooms, you may encounter a small group of kobolds that
  tries to edge away from you (1 in 21 chance, if it hasn't yet happened):
  * "C"ombat: fight 2 KOBOLD (#0) and 4 KOBOLD LEADER (#1) (Morale 25).
  * "P"arley (with any attitude): "The kobolds fawn on you pathetically.
    'Please, oh please noble ones, don't hurt us,' they beg.  'We were sent on
    a scouting mission by our king.  Rumors of a wondrous pool came to him in
    his lair.  We are all that remains of the mighty band that was sent west to
    test the tales.  We mean you no harm.  We only seek to return to our
    families.'"

21 (7,13) - "A lizardman leads a pack of giant lizards on patrol before a door
  that has been nailed closed.  Seeing you, the monsters attack!"  Fight 1
  LIZARDMAN (#57) and 4 GIANT LIZARD (#59) (Morale 75, 99 XP).

22 (7,14) - "A wide-eyed woman is seated on a rug.  At your entry, she stands.
  'Greetings bold ones, I have long awaited your coming.  My time here is short
  for the world enters a new age.  An evil spirit from an unholy pool guides
  your enemies.  It hides behind a fair countenance.  Be not deceived.'  With
  that, the woman is gone."

  If you then search, "Beneath a rug you find a compartment containing arms and
  armor."  The treasure is Banded Mail +1, Quarter Staff +1, and Bracers AC 4
  (533 XP).

SECTION 6.6.1 - Kuto's Well Catacombs Overview
----------------------------------------------

Plot background:

The half-orc bandit Norris the Gray and his bandit horde hide out here.

Strategy:

The council never tells you to defeat Norris the Gray, but will reward you for
doing so.  This is another place to explore if you cannot yet clear the Slums
or Sokal Keep.  Defeat Norris at any location 12 and retrieve his treasure at
location 13.

SECTION 6.6.2 - Kuto's Well Catacombs Details
---------------------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 29

 0                                                    0  KEY:
                                       #######
 1                                     #   13#        1  # wall
                              ##########     #           + door/archway
 2                            #              #        2  ~ secret door
      ##########              #     ##########
 3    #        #              #   12#                 3  E Entrance/exit
      #        ################  #++#
 4    #           +        +     #  #                 4
      #        ####        #######  #
 5    #12      ####12      #######  #                 5
      #++##########  #############++#
 6    #  ##########  ##########     #                 6
      #  ##########  ##########     ##########
 7    #  ########## 6####E1####              #        7
      #  ##########~~####++####  ####        #
 8    #  ########## 6     9####  ####        #        8
      #  #############     ####  ####++#######
 9    #        #######     +     ####  #              9
      #        #######     ##########  #
10    #   11   ####        ##########  #             10
      ####++#######  ####  ##########++#
11       #  #######  #  #  +           #             11
         #  #######++#  ##########     #
12       #  #######  #           #     #             12
         #++#######  ####        #######
13       #     10       #                            13
         ####        ####
14          #  10    #                               14
            ##########
15                                                   15

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Random encounters: None.

Resting: If you have defeated Norris the Gray, resting is always safe.
  Otherwise, he will ambush you himself (same confrontation as in location 12).

Clearing the area: Though the council does not give a formal commission, it
  will award the party for defeating Norris the Gray.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The ambushes are more complicated in
  the tabletop version, though the map is similar.

E1 [location 16] (7,7) - Exit to Kuto's Well (7,7).

6 - This secret door is not usable unless you detect it.

9/10/11 - If Norris the Gray has not been defeated, skulking kobolds launch
  arrows (THAC0 21 attacks on random characters, 1d6 damage per hit; 4 attacks
  at 9, 1 at 10 and 11) at your party here.  (You cannot immediately reach the
  kobolds from this location.)

12 - If Norris the Gray has not been defeated, he will confront you at the
  first of these locations you reach.  (He's familiar enough with the catacombs
  to beat you to any of them.)
  * If you "S"urrender: You lose all your money and light items plus some
    heavier items, and you are moved above ground.
  * If you "F"ight, it is against NORRIS THE GRAY (#32), 5 LIZARDMAN (#57), and
    9 KOBOLD LEADER (#1) (Morale 70, 208 XP).  Norris the Gray carries a Long
    Sword +1.

    "On the leader's body, you find a curious message."  (Journal Entry 50)
    "You have defeated the dreaded bandit gang and rid Phlan of a great evil.
    The honest settlers will cheer your deeds!  You have also taken possession
    of a hideout in which you may rest undisturbed from the rigors of your
    questing."

    Sleep and Hold Person should be enough to win this combat, though Sleep
    doesn't work on Norris himself.

13 (13,1) - Here you find Norris the Gray's treasure hoard: 20 gems, 92 gold,
  and 2300 silver (867 XP).

  (If unclaimed, this treasure will disappear if you leave the Kuto's Well area
  after defeating Norris the Gray.)

SECTION 6.7.1 - Mendor's Library Overview
-----------------------------------------

Plot background:

Mendor's Library was one of the foremost centers of knowledge in the Moonsea
region before Phlan's fall.  In Phlan's last days, Mendor tried to build up
knowledge to thwart the fall, but failed.  The monsters don't know what to do
with the books, but the Boss does want the information therein -- but the
Flight of the Dragons two years ago seriously distracted him.  The council now
seeks to recover this lost knowledge.

Strategy:

Before you come here, equip as many party members as possible with magical
weapons (+1 is good enough) and mirrors, and have the Knock spell prepared.  If
you don't have Knock yourself, you can hire a THEURGIST in the Phlan training
hall.  Be wary of dismissing the NPC within the library as it is possible to
lock yourself inside if you cannot cast Knock yourself.

Search for two books in location 2 and three books in location 4; the valuable
books will each give you a Journal Entry.  You must also defeat the basilisk at
location 5.  You should also get the Manual of Bodily Health at location 13 for
your own use.

When you leave, be prepared for the attack by the spectral librarian.

SECTION 6.7.2 - Mendor's Library Details
----------------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 15
   #############++###################++#############
 0 #            E1                   E1            #  0  KEY:
   #                                               #
 1 #                        E3                     #  1  # wall
   #     ###################XX###################  #     + door/archway
 2 #     #  +  #        #        #        #  +  #  #  2  X locked door
   #     #  ####  ####  #        #  ####  ####  #  #
 3 #     #  +  #  ####  #    9   #  ####  #  +  #  #  3  E Entrance/exit
   #     #  ####  ####  #        #  ####  ####  #  #
 4 +E2   #  +  #    5   #        #    4   #  +  #  #  4
   #     #  #######++#######++#######++#######  #  #
 5 #     #                                      #  #  5
   #     ####++####++#++#++#  #++#++#++####++####  #
 6 #     #    3   #  #  #  #  #  #  #  #    2   #  #  6
   #     #  ####  ##########  ##########  ####  #  #
 7 #     #  ####  #       7+  + 6      #  ####  #  #  7
   #     #  ####  #        #  #        #  ####  #  #
 8 #     #        #        #  #        #        #  #  8
   #     ###################++###################  #
 9 #     #             1+        #14   #        #  #  9
   #     #              #######  #++####        #  #
10 #     #              #   15+10 10   +18      #  # 10
   #     #     ####     #######        #        #  #
11 +E2   #     #  #     #    8+        #        #  # 11
   #     #     ####     #     #        ##########  #
12 #     #              #     #      11+12      #  # 12
   #     #              #     #  #++####        #  #
13 #     #              #     #  #16   #   13   #  # 13
   #     ######################XX################  #
14 #                           E3                  # 14
   #                                               #
15 #                                               # 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Random encounters: None.

Fleeing: Your party is moved to one of: (7,9); (5,5); (9,9); (9,11).

Resting: It is always safe to rest anywhere.

Clearing the block: The block is considered cleared once you defeat both the
  basilisk and the spectre, even if you have not recovered all the books of
  interest.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: "Mantor"'s library has a very
  different layout and different treasure and monsters, though the books of
  interest have the exact same text.

E1 - Exit to Kuto's Well.

E2 - Exit to Cadorna Textile House.

E3 - Entrance to Mendor's Library.  You need the Knock spell to reliably open
  the door at low level; Strength 18(00) won't work reliably for a "B"ash
  attempt, and a high-level thief has no chance at all to "P"ick it.

  If you attempt to leave the library having taken at least 1 book, the first
  time you do so you are attacked by the SPECTRE (#17) (Morale 100, 338 XP)
  guarding the library.  Surprised is rolled for, but the party cannot surprise
  the spectre.

  The spectral librarian has a dangerous level-draining attack; casting
  Protection from Evil on everyone before the combat begins helps prevent it
  from landing.  You can restore drained levels with the scroll found at
  location 5.

1 - "You see what was once was garden, now weed filled.  The pleasant pond has
  become a swamp."

  The garden is now overrun with green slime; there is a 7 in 26 chance every
  move you encounter it.  This is resolved by rolling surprise, with the slime
  taking a -2 penalty if you are in Search mode:
  * If you surprise the slime, and it doesn't surprise you, you avoid it: 'You
    see a strange green plant growth which you recognize as green slime.  You
    carefully move around it.'
  * Otherwise, you step in it; a random character takes 1d4 damage.  (This does
    not function like the tabletop version of green slime, thankfully.)
  You will automatically avoid the green slime after 7 encounters with it.

2 - Philosophy section.  Searching this area has a chance of yielding a book
  you may take:
  (1) Fyerdetha's Discourses on Power (Journal Entry 7)
  (2) Urgund's Description of Darkness (Journal Entry 19)
  (3) A marginally useful book (always in this order):
      (a) Meditations
      (b) The Harmony of the Rock
      (c) Strom's Discussions of Poetics
      (d) Chronicles of Arram
      (e) Discourse on the Nature of Writing
  The chance is 1 in 12 for each of the three categories, re-rolled if there is
  no book to find.  Otherwise, "You find works on natural philosophy, theories
  of art, and the supernatural sciences.  It is very boring."

3 - Mathematics section.  There are no books of interest in this section: "You
  find essays on geometry, metamagical math, universal geometry, etc., But
  nothing useful."

4 - History section.  Searching this area has a chance of yielding a book you
  may take:
  (1) The History of the North (Journal Entry 8)
  (2) Lex Geographica (Journal Entry 37)
  (3) The Grand Historian's Records of the Arts of War (Journal Entry 21)
      (Co-authored by Sima Qian and Sun Tzu, evidently.)
  The chance is 1 in 18 for each, re-rolled if you already took that book.
  Otherwise, "You find various books which are so filled with myth that you
  don't find anything useful."

5 - Rhetoric section.  There are no books of interest in this section, but you
  will encounter 1 BASILISK (#26) (Morale 100, 541 XP); it cares not for
  rhetoric so parleying won't have any effect.  Winning yields a treasure of
  Potion of Giant Strength, Potion of Healing, Cloak of Displacement, Clerical
  Scroll (Restoration, Restoration).

  Have mirrors equipped before entering, to reflect the basilisk's petrifying
  gaze.

6/7 - "You see a chamber filled with rotted furniture and benches."

8 (8,11) - "You see a ruined room with rotted furniture.  Human bones lie
  scattered about a desk."  If you search, "You see a jar under the
  floorboards."  It contains 3 Potions of Extra Healing (200 XP).

9 - "You see an empty room.  The only feature is a series of frescoes on the
  walls of learned men and the heavenly patrons of art and learning.  You get a
  feeling of peace."

10 - "You enter a hall which is filled with rows of writing tables and high
  stools.  Rotted mounds of parchment litter the room."

11 (11,12) - You encounter a MAD MAN (#25) here.  If you parley with him, his
  rantings turn out to have a bit of truth, chosen from the following:
  * 'He is wrapped in fire and so cruel!'
  * 'The big one, the evil one in the castle of flowers -- he is coming!  It is
    coming!'
  * 'Don't go there!  Don't go on the hill!'
  * 'He is not human I tell you!  Not at all!'

  If you invite him to join, he will be reluctant but will join as an NPC
  (Morale 0).  He will randomly cause trouble in New Phlan, however, and even
  aside from that, Morale 0 is hard to tolerate.

12 (12,12) - "This room was once a study.  It is now a shattered ruin."

13 (13,13) - If you search here, "Buried amid all the trash you see the book."
  It is a Manual of Bodily Health (800 XP).  (This can be seriously abused to
  great profit; read the section on that if you are interested.)

14/15/16 - If you search here, you may find and take 3 Sheets of Gold (which do
  not have any value or use).

18 (12,10) - This storeroom has 5 KOBOLD (#0) (Morale 10) who promptly
  surrender; if you accept their surrender, they will draw a map (Journal Entry
  10).

SECTION 6.8.1 - Podal Plaza Overview
------------------------------------

Plot background:

Podal Plaza is a hotbed of monstrous humanoid activity; you must pass through
it to reach Stojanow Gate and Valjevo Castle.  You may also receive a
commission to learn about a magical item being auctioned here.

Strategy:

Once you receive the commission, choose "Disguise party as monsters" when
entering, then go directly to the auction at location 1.  Keep a low profile
("S"ly is probably your best parley option if challenged) and you should learn
enough to complete the commission.

You can also duel the buccaneer at location 2 to get his magical gear.

SECTION 6.8.2 - Podal Plaza Details
-----------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 18
   #############++###################++#############
 0 #        +  #E4#     #     #  #  #E4#     +     #  0  KEY:
   #     #######  #     #     #++#  #  #     #++####
 1 #     #     #  #     #     #  #  #  #     #     #  1  # wall
   ####++#     #  #     #++####  #++#  #++####     #     + Door/archway
 2 #     #     +  +     #                    +     #  2  X locked door
   #     #######  ####++#                    #######
 3 #     +                P  P  P  P  P  P      +  #  3  E Entrance/exit
   #######                       #++#           ####     P Plaza open area
 4 +E3        P  P  P  P  P  P  P#  # P  P       E1+  4    (random encounters)
   #######     #++#              #++#     #++#######
 5 #     # P  P#  # P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P#        #  5
   #     #     #++#        ####           #     ####
 6 #     + P  P  P  P  P  1+  # P  P  P  P+     #  #  6
   #     #                 #  #           #######  #
 7 #     # P  P  P  P  P  1#  # P  P  P  P      +  #  7
   #++####++#######        #++#     ####     #######
 8 #  #     #    2+    P  1#  # P  P#### P  5+ 6   #  8
   #++####  #     #        ####     ####     #     #
 9 #     #  #     # P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P#     #  9
   #     ####     #                          #######
10 #     #  #     # P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   +  # 10
   ####++#  #######              ####           ####
11 +E3                 P  P  P  P#  + P  P  P    E1+ 11
   ####++####++#     ####++#     ####        #++####
12 #     #     #     #     #    P  P  P  P   #     # 12
   #############  ####     #++#        ####  #######
13 #     XE5      +  #     #  #        #  #  +     # 13
   #     #++#++#  #######++#  ####++#  #  #++#     #
14 #     #  #  #  +     +  #  #     #  +  #  #     # 14
   #     ####  #  #     #  #  #     #  #  #  #     #
15 #    4   XE5#E2#     #  +  #     #E2#  #  #     # 15
   #############++###################++#############
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Commission: If you have received the Phlan clerk's commission (#4) to
  investigate the auction here, you choose one of three options upon entering:
  * "Stride boldly forward"
  * "Disguise party as monsters"
  * "Sneak, remaining unseen"
  This choice determines your ability to remain undercover long enough to
  complete the mission.

Random encounters: These are only checked for in open areas, marked P on the
  map.  Surprise never happens; you will always have the opportunity to parley.

  Monsters are chosen with the following algorithm; they start at Distance 0 if
  you are on mission, 2 otherwise.

  Base number of base monsters is calculated by:
    1. Divide Party Strength by the indicated divisor; call the result X.
    2. Set X to a random number between X and 2X, inclusive.
    3. If you are on mission, and you chose to "stride boldly forward" or lost
       stealth, multiply X by 2.
    4. X must be between 2 and 50, inclusive.
  Par Mod is the parley modifier of this group (not used while on mission).
  Lead Thr. is the minimum number of monsters needed for leaders to appear.
  Move is movement, for determining success of "F"lee; this is compared to the
    movement of your slowest party member.

              Base                   Base  Par  Lead  Leaders (+10
    Chance  Number  Base Monster   Morale  Mod  Thr.  Morale if present)  Move
    ------  ------  ------------   ------  ---  ----  ------------------  ----
    2 in 9  PS / 3  GOBLIN GUARD (#2)  30   30    40  5 GOBLIN LEADER (#3)   6
    2 in 9  PS / 3  GOBLIN GUARD (#2)  35   20    40  5 GOBLIN LEADER (#3)   6
    2 in 9  PS / 3  ORC (#4)           40   20    30  4 ORC LEADER (#5)      9
    1 in 9  PS / 3  ORC (#4)           45   10    30  4 ORC LEADER (#5)      9
    1 in 9  PS / 6  HOBGOBLIN (#6)     45    0    20  3 HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7)   9
    1 in 9  PS /12  OGRE (#8)          50    0   N/A  N/A                    9

  If you have received the Phlan clerk's commission to investigate the auction:
    There is a 3 in 26 chance the monsters are just gossiping; the gossip
    cycles through the following:
    1. 'Do you think he'll really show up -- the Boss I mean?'
    2. 'More ogres on the street, since the giants took over the castle.'
    3. 'He melted into a puddle of lard when he touched the thing!'
    4. 'The Boss will be the guy bidding up the price.'
    5. 'The plaza's Bane temple is recruiting for Mace again.  Grishnak won't
       be happy.'

    The chance of a confrontation is 4 in 26, or 9 in 26 in Search mode.
    * If you chose to 'stride boldly forward', any attempt to "P"arley will
      result in combat.
    * If you are disguised, there is a (6 + 5 per non-human in party) in 101
      chance that the monsters will demand, 'Who are you?':
      * "H"aughty or "A"busive: if Party Strength is at least 1d51, you avoid
        combat: "They grumble and move on."  Otherwise, the monsters attack.
      * "S"ly: if the current character's Charisma reaction modifier is greater
        than or equal to 1d31, you avoid combat: 'Oh, you're here for the
        Boss.'  Otherwise, the monsters attack.
      * "N"ice or "M"eek: immediately start combat (you just gave away your
        heroic character!)
    * If you are sneaking:
      * 1 in 6: you get the same demand as above.
      * 2 in 6: "You stop, and they move on."
      * 3 in 6: "Your party slips past them."

  If you have not received the commission, or if you have already completed it:
    The chance of a random encounter is 1 in 26, or 8 in 26 if you are in
    Search mode.  To determine the result of a "P"arley, add together the
    following:
    1. 9 for "H"aughty; 19 for "S"ly, "N"ice, or "M"eek; 29 for "A"busive
    2. 1d51
    3. Twice the current character's Charisma reaction modifier
    4. The monster group's parley modifier

    If the resulting score is:
    * Less than 90: 'We're going to have to teach you a lesson!'  The monsters
      attack.
    * 90...111: "'Move it, troll-bait!' they snarl and move off."
    * 112 or more: "'We'll let you off this time.'  The monsters scuttle away."
    Any option will always work to avoid combat if the current character's
    Charisma is at least 16.

Fleeing: Your party is moved to one of: (4,0); (5,1); (6,2); (7,3); (9,4);
  (10,5); (11,6); (12,7).

Resting: You may safely rest in the hidden temple of Ilmater, or if you have
  cleared the block.  Otherwise, rest is interrupted quickly, with a 16%
  chance every 10 minutes.

Clearing the block: You can clear the block once you have defeated 10 random
  encounters while not on mission.  If you have received the commission but
  have not completed it, this counter will be reset to 0 every time you enter
  the map.  You cannot ever clear the block if you received the commission,
  then either chose to "stride boldly forward" or lost stealth.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: In "Podol" Plaza, disguising yourself
  is less reliable, though you can actually win the auction and claim the wand
  (though doing so costs more than its market value).

E1 - Exit to Kuto's Well.

E2 - Exit to Cadorna Textile House.

E3 - Exit to Wilderness (24,28).

E4 - Exit to Stojanow Gate.

E5 - Entrance to hidden temple of Ilmater.  The door is hard-to-open: bashing
  the lock can work but not reliably; a thief can never succeed; the Knock
  spell will always work.

1 - If you have received the Phlan clerk's commission to investigate the
  auction here, and you neither chose to "stride boldly forward" nor lost
  stealth, entering one of these squares triggers the start of the auction.
  "The auctioneer cries 'Creatures of all ages, welcome to this auction for an
  item both magical and powerful!'  The auctioneer has either a wand or staff."

  If you chose to "stride boldly forward" or lost stealth before starting the
  auction, you cannot ever either complete the mission, or clear the block if
  you have not already done so.

  If you chose to disguise the party as monsters, your chance of evading
  detection when checked is 5 in 6.  If you are sneaking, you are always
  detected when checked.  If you are detected, you are confronted by the most
  recent monster group you had met, as if you were striding boldly forward.

  When the auction begins, you may:
  * Stand and listen: No risk; the auction proceeds.
  * Move in closer: You must roll to avoid detection, though if you succeed
    "You now see the wand isn't a major artifact, it's only a Wand of Fear!"
    If you do not get caught, the auction proceeds.
  * Listen to comments: No risk; you hear one of two rumors:
    * 'It's a Wand of Illumination.  Who cares, I see in the dark anyway!'
    * 'It's a Staff of Command.  I could have my own army!'
    and the auction proceeds.
  * Leave: You must roll to avoid detection, and you do not see the rest of the
    auction.

  If the auction proceeds, the high bidder of 5000 gold is a magic-user named
  Garwin, accompanied by an ogre named Buldwar.  You may:
  * Make a bid: You do not actually need the 5000 gold for this.  You must roll
    to avoid detection.  If you succeed, "The man then speaks a word and the
    auctioneer's block is enveloped in darkness.  There is mass confusion.
    Suddenly, the ogre sprints from the darkness."  You may then:
    * Follow the ogre: You seize and search Buldwar, but he doesn't have the
      wand.  You must then roll to evade detection.
    * Move quietly away: You must roll to avoid detection, and you do not see
      the rest of the auction.
    * Look for the man in plain clothes: No risk; you will be unable to find
      Garwin, though.
  * Wait for winner: No risk.  "'Going ... going ... gone!' the auctioneer
    cries.  A man and ogre exchange the wand and a large bag, then disappear
    into the crowd."
  * Leave: You must roll to avoid detection, and you do not see the rest of the
    auction.

  You cannot win the auction yourself; the wand is not significant, anyway.
  (In the tabletop version, no one even knows its command word.)  Any result of
  the above will complete the mission, even if you don't see the end of the
  auction as requested by the council.

2 (4,8) - The Pitt, a monster tavern.  This game predates Fallout 3 by more
  than twenty years, so you won't find the Lone Wanderer here.

  The first time you enter, "You opened the door into a drunk buccaneer.  He
  glares at you, 'One of you shall pay for this insult.  Who will it be?'"  You
  may:
  * "C"hallenge him and fight 1 4TH LVL FIGHTER (#41) (Morale undefined), one-
    on-one, without other repercussions; you even get to keep his Long Sword +1
    and Chain Mail +1.  The easy way to beat him is by casting Sleep, which
    works more often than not.
  * "A"ttack him outright, which results in a full combat with 1 4TH LVL
    FIGHTER (#41), 4 HOBGOBLIN (#6), 12 GOBLIN GUARD (#2), and 8 ORC (#4)
    (Morale 30, 234 XP).
  * "F"lee, which will work but causes the loss of any stealth in this visit.
  * "B"ribe him with 10% of your money and light items.

  Once the buccaneer encounter is resolved, you can hang out in the bar:
  * Mix with monsters: if you are not disguised, this causes the bar's
    patrons to attack, as above.  If you are disguised, "Monsters insult your
    abilities and parentage."  You may respond:
    * Attack or Insult back results in a tavern brawl where some monsters
      are your side.  Monsters are 25 GOBLIN GUARD (#2), 20 HOBGOBLIN (#6), and
      5 OGRE (#8) (Morale 50); up to 21 of the non-ogres will be allied.
    * Try to leave: causes the bar's patrons to attack, as above (including
      that buccaneer).
    * Joining in heavy drinking: same result as "Drink heavily" below.
  * Drink heavily: the party wakes up drunk in the alley behind the bar with
    all its money and 50% of its light items missing, and causes the loss of
    any stealth in this visit.
  * Attack: results in the same combat as attacking the buccaneer (including
    the buccaneer).

  Any combat with the bar's patrons aside from the buccaneer results in the
  bar's abandonment, unlike the taverns in New Phlan.  (Monsters evidently have
  the sense to avoid places where deadly tavern brawls have happened!)

4 (1,15) - "This is a hidden temple of Ilmater.  You feel safe here."  The
  priestess of Ilmater can heal you; her services are the same as those in New
  Phlan, detailed in the Temple Spells section.

5 (13,8) - "This is a small shrine.  Symbols of Bane have replaced those of
  Ilmater."

6 (14,8) - You meet an orc priest of Bane here:
  * "A"ttack: fight 1 ORC LEADER (#5) (Morale 90, Distance 1).
  * "G"reet: as "A"ttack, if you are on mission and you did not "disguise party
    as monsters".  Otherwise, the orc asks:
    * If you have not cleared the main Temple of Bane, 'We are recruiting
      creatures for our temple to the northeast.  Are you interested?'
    * If you have, 'We are hiring creatures to recover our temple.  Are you
      interested?'

    Regardless of whether you say yes or no, you will be asked to return in two
    hours.  If you do return, "Many creatures have gathered.  The robed orc
    stands and calls out, 'First, to show your loyalties, kill the
    unbelievers.'  He points at your group."  Fight 8 ORC (#4), 3 OGRE (#8), 1
    ORC LEADER (#5) (Morale 50, Distance 1).

  At the end of either combat, you can pick up 6 Leather Holy Symbols (of Bane)
  which are of slight use on the mission to clear the larger temple of Bane.

SECTION 6.9.1 - Cadorna Textile House Overview
----------------------------------------------

Plot background:

Junior Councilman Porphyrys Cadorna is the last heir to the Cadorna family
fortune.  He hired an adventurer to search the old Cadorna Textile House, but
nothing has been heard from him.  He will hire your party to search for both
the adventurer and the Cadorna family treasure, and will pay for the return
of the treasure.

Strategy:

After Cadorna tasks you with finding his family treasure, go straight to
location 24, and have a thief climb down the well to talk to Restal.  Agree to
his offer.

Defeat Grishnak at location 18, for magic-user scrolls and a Brass Key.  Use
the Brass Key to free Skullcrusher at location 17.  He can provide hints
leading you to the ogre at location 21.  Take the Cadorna family treasure
unopened, and return it to Restal, who can open the treasure and re-create the
seal.

While the council will also reward you for clearing random encounters here
after that, most random combats feature either monsters that have deadly poison
attacks, or undead that can drain levels; you may want to defer that.

SECTION 6.9.2 - Cadorna Textile House Details
---------------------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 2
   #############++###################++#############
 0 #  #     +  #E2#  +  ####  +  #   E2#     +     #  0  KEY:
   #  #######  #  #  #  ####  #  #  ####     #     #
 1 #  +  #     #  #  #        #  #  #        #     #  1  # wall
   ####++####++#  #++#######++#++#  #++#############     ~ illusionary wall
 2 #     +                                   ~     #  2  ' rubbled wall
   ####  #  ####++####  #######++#  '''''''  ####++#     + door/archway
 3 #  +24#  #23      #  #  +     #  '     '  +     #  3
   ####  #  ####     #  #  #  ####  '     '  #######     E Entrance/exit
 4 +E3   +  +  +     #  #  #  ####  '     '  '   E1+  4
   #######  ##########  ####++####  ''''++'  #######
 5 #     #                                   #     #  5
   #     #  #++''''  ####'''     ##########  #++## #
 6 #     #  #23   '  +   23'     #23+     #  #     #  6
   #++#++#  #     '  #######     ####     #  #     #
 7 #  #  +  #     '              #        #  +     #  7
   #############''##########     ####++####  #######
 8 #   23# 5+  #  #        #              '      23#  8
   #     #  #  #  #        #++#############++#######
 9 #     #  # 4#  # 2     2#  #13    12#  +     +  #  9
   #'''  ####++#  #++####++#  #######++#  #     ####
10 #  '  +  +    1           1      +  #  #     #  # 10
   #'''  #######              #######++#++#######  #
11 +E3   #   18+     24a      #   14+16#         E1+ 11
   ####  #     #     ####     #     #  #++##########
12 #  #  #18   #     ####     #14 15#  #  '        # 12
   #  #  #++####     ####     #++#######  '        #
13 #23+  #19#  +             1         +  '        # 13
   ####  #++#++#  #++####++#++#++##########''#     #
14 #     # 8  8#  # 3  7  3#  #      20~21#  #     # 14
   #     #++####  #++#     #  #     ####  ####     #
15 #     #17#     # 6+     #  #     #        #     # 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Random encounters: The chance of a random encounter is 1 in 31, or 1 in 6 if
  you are in Search mode.

  If you are in the south-central hobgoblin-patrolled portion of the map, and
  have not defeated the ogre at location 21, you always encounter:
    8 HOBGOBLIN (#6) and 1 HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7) (Morale 60, Distance 2, 40 XP)
  which do not count towards the encounter limit, and do not stop until you
  have defeated the ogre at location 21.

  Otherwise, there are 10 random encounters in the rest of the Cadorna Textile
  House, which do not scale to the party's strength.  (The 10th does not show
  up until after you have defeated the ogre.)  To determine which one, roll
  1d11 and add the number of random encounters already fought:
    * 1...4: 8 POISONOUS FROG (#38) (Morale 60, 52 XP)
    * 5...8: 3 LARGE SCORPION (#18) and 1 HUGE SCORPION (#39) (Morale 50,
      Distance 1, 64 XP)
    * 9...13: 5 GHOUL (#72) and 1 WIGHT (#20) (Morale 100, Distance 2, 180 XP)
    * 14...18: 10 SKELETON (#34), 8 ZOMBIE (#35), and 1 WIGHT (#20) (Morale
      100, Distance 2, 200 XP)
    * 19 or more: 8 HOBGOBLIN (#6) and 1 HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7) (Morale 60,
      Distance 2, 40 XP)
  None of these monsters can be bargained with once encountered.

Fleeing: If you were confronting hobgoblins, your party escapes to one of:
  (4,11); (8,8); (4,14); (12,13).

  Otherwise, your party is moved to one of: (4,2); (12,2).

Resting: You may rest without being interrupted by monsters outside the
  hobgoblin-patrolled area if you have defeated all 10 random encounters; in
  the hobgoblin-patrolled area, you must defeat the ogre at location 21 to rest
  safely.  Otherwise, rest has a 6% chance of being disturbed every hour by a
  random encounter.

  Your rest may still be disturbed even if it is safe, but it is by nothing
  (this is a bug).

Clearing the block: The council considers the block cleared once you have both
  defeated all 10 non-hobgoblin random encounters, and defeated the ogre at
  location 21 who leads the hobgoblins.  For the block clearing to trigger,
  you must wander around until a random combat is rolled for; only then does
  the game script recognize there are none left (there is no visible sign of
  this).

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The tabletop version has a different
  layout, is inhabited entirely by gnolls, lacks Skullcrusher and the thieves'
  guild, and the family treasure is not sealed.

E1 - Exit to Mendor's Library.

E2 - Exit to Podal Plaza.

E3 - Exit to Wilderness (24,28).

1 - If the thieves did not sneak you into the textile house, the first time you
  enter one of these locations, "You are entering a weedy, garbage strewn
  courtyard.  A drum begins to beat and hobgoblins attack."  Fight 12 HOBGOBLIN
  (#6) and 2 HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7) (Morale 60, 63 XP).  If you win, "Things seem
  strangely quiet.  The drum has faded to silence."

  If the thieves did sneak you in, you circumvent this battle.

2 - "This cavernous building serves as a barracks."  You encounter 14 HOBGOBLIN
  (#6) and 3 HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7) (Morale 60, 76 XP), who attack if you do
  anything other than "F"lee.

3 - "You are appalled by the stench in this damp building."

4 (3,9) - "You are in a deteriorated building."

5 (2,8) - "When you entered, a few faded, motheaten tapestries flutter
  mournfully."  You encounter 10 HOBGOBLIN (#6) and 2 HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7)
  (Morale 60, 54 XP), who attack if you do anything other than "F"lee.  This
  combat can re-spawn.

6 (5,15) - "Several baby hobgoblins flee, screaming in fear!"  No, you can't
  kill them.

7 (6,14) - "'Skullcrusher was here' is carved into the north wall."  If he is
  in your party, "Skullcrusher proudly points out his handiwork."

8 - "Graffiti covers the walls in meaningless abandon."  You encounter 12
  HOBGOBLIN (#6) and 2 HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7) (Morale 60, 63 XP), who attack if you
  do anything other than "F"lee.

12 (9,11) - "You can barely see a dark object to the west", if you have not
  visited location 13 and destroyed it.

13 (9,9) - "You see a dead hobgoblin with its head crushed.  Written in blood
  is a message: 'Skullcrusher was here.'"  If Skullcrusher is in your party,
  "Skullcrusher laughs and cracks his knuckles."  Nothing is on the body.

14 - "A simple kitchen; a few clay bowls adorn the floor."

15 (10,12) - "The remains of a smoking fire."

16 (11,11) - "Bread and meat lie about, as well as pieces of human anatomy."

17 (2,15) - "You are in a very small, dark room.  A muscular man locked in
  chains lies here.  Near him is a page."  (Journal Entry 47)  The only way to
  free him is to use the Brass Key from the combat with Grishnak at location
  18.

  If you then "P"arley with any attitude other than "A"busive, 'Thanks for
  freeing me.  I'm Lord Cadorna's servant.'  You may then ask SKULLCRUSHER
  (#28) (Morale 100) to join your party: 'Great! My name is Skullcrusher.
  There's a secret door to the southeast.  That's where I met the hobgoblin
  leader.'

18 - "You are in a large room which serves as a crude temple, and causes a
  vague feeling of disquiet.  Atop a small bone altar, stands an ancient
  hobgoblin.  She screams 'I am the mighty Grishnak!  You have interrupted my
  unholy rites!  Feel my infernal wrath!'"  Fight GRISHNAK (#28), 12 HOBGOBLIN
  (#6) and 3 HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7) (Morale 100, 353 XP).

  You will find among the hobgoblins' items: Cursed Necklace, Brass Key, Potion
  of Healing, Magic-User Scroll (Reduce, Detect Invisibility, Fireball), and
  Magic-User Scroll (Burning Hands, Mirror Image, Blink).  (The Stone Statuette
  is heavy and useless.)

  (In other news, evidently the Boss offers sex-change operations to veterans
  of Sauron's armies.)

19 (2,13) - "This room has had blood smeared on the floor and walls in a
  ritual, unholy manner."

20 (11,14) - If Skullcrusher is in your party and you have not yet defeated the
  ogre, "'In the east wall is the secret door,' says Skullcrusher.  'If we go
  through we can surprise them.'"

21 (12,14) - "This room is dimly lit with guttering torches.  You see the chief
  of the hobgoblins, a huge ogre.  As you enter, he rises to his full ten feet
  of height, his head wreathed in the flickering shadows.  'Puny creatures,'
  he bellows.  'I allowed you to toy with my minions, but now I'll crush the
  life from your limbs.'"  Fight 1 OGRE (#8), 18 HOBGOBLIN (#6) and 4 HOBGOBLIN
  LDR (#7) (Morale 100, Distance 1, 132 XP).

  If you defeat them, you find the sealed Cadorna family treasure, which you
  may either "T"ake unopened, or "O"pen immediately for 1943 XP, 4 jewelry, 8
  gems, 400 platinum, 20 silver, 450 copper, four pieces of item jewelry,
  Gauntlets of Ogre Power, and the potential wrath of Junior Councilman
  Porphyrys Cadorna.

  You get a slightly better total reward if you have the thief Restal at
  location 24 open the treasure and recreate the seal, then return it to
  Cadorna.

23 - You find a page from a diary (Journal Entry 11) in the first one of these
  locations you enter.

24 (1,3) - "On the well is a note, 'Thieves only.'  The well has no rungs or
  rope and seems very deep.  Only a skillful climber could survive the
  descent."

  Any non-thief who attempts to climb down will fall, taking 15d6 damage;
  equipping a Ring of Feather Falling does not prevent damage, though it is
  supposed to.  (That's a fall of 150 feet!)  A thief can successfully climb
  down with a standard Climb Walls roll to avoid falling.  If you reach the
  bottom alive, you greet the thief Restal:
  * If you did not successfully climb down, or are not on Junior Councilman
    Cadorna's mission, he magically expels you from the well.
  * If you were not expelled, and have not yet retrieved the treasure, he
    offers 'You are seeking the textile house.  We can get you in unseen and
    possibly help you with the treasure.'  If you accept, you are moved to
    location 24a (6,11): "You are blindfolded and taken on a long, twisting
    walk, then up a ladder.  'Only meet us at the main well.'"  This also
    disables the combat at location 1, but you are otherwise on your own.
  * If you then bring back the unopened Cadorna family treasure, he offers 'We
    can duplicate the seal on that chest -- for half the treasure -- no one
    will ever know.'  If you accept, you receive 2 jewelry, 4 gems, 200
    platinum, four pieces of item jewelry, and Gauntlets of Ogre Power (1200
    XP).

    If you are not above exploiting a scripting bug, you can leave the map
    then immediately return.  This will reset the treasure-opened flag without
    flagging the quest as complete (which only happens if you return to New
    Phlan).  Restal will then offer to open and re-seal the treasure as if you
    hadn't opened it.

SECTION 6.10.1 - Kovel Mansion Overview
---------------------------------------

Plot background:

The main thieves' guild of Phlan now operates out of ancient Kovel Mansion.
The council wants you to clear the thieves out; you may keep whatever treasure
they happen to have.

Strategy:

Even if you set off traps here, they don't actually do much damage.

Go first to location 14 and deliberately set off the ambush there, then collect
the treasure.  Then, fight the set combat at location 16.  Those two combats,
plus a single combat against another thief, should complete the mission.

You can also collect the treasures at locations 9, 10, 12, and 13; these can be
retrieved even by low-level characters.

SECTION 6.10.2 - Kovel Mansion Details
--------------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 14
   #############++###################++#############
 0 #            E2                   E2            #  0  KEY:
   #                                               #
 1 #                                               #  1  # wall
   #        ###################++#++#############  #     + door/archway
 2 #        #     #     #     #     +B2         #  #  2
   #        #     #     #     #     #           #  #     E Entrance/exit
 3 #        #   T8+B2 B2+B1 B1+     #   B2      #  #  3  B Thief backstab
   #        #     ####++#######++#++####++#######  #     C Thief chase
 4 #        #14   #        #     #     #        #E1+  4  T Trap
   #        #######        #     #     #        #  #
 5 #        #   20#   15   +     #     +   C2   #  #  5
   #        #++################++#++#######++####  #
 6 #        #   B2+T7      #     #     #   B1   #  #  6
   #  #######     #        #     #     #        #  #
 7 #  +     #     #   13   #     #     +B1      #  #  7
   #  #     #     #############++#     #        #  #
 8 #  #     #B2 B2#     #      C1+     #        #  #  8
   #  #######++#++#     #        ################  #
 9 #  #     #  #B1    B1+        # 9      #     #  #  9
   #  #     #  #        ####++####        #++####  #
10 #  +     #  #        #        #   T3   #   10#  # 10
   #  #     #++##########        ####++####     #  #
11 #  #     #T6   #   B1+        +B1 B1 B1+T4   #E1+ 11
   #  #######     #     ####++####++####  #     #  #
12 #  #     #   T6+B1   #   B2   #18   #B1#     #  # 12
   #  #     #++####     ####++####     #++#######  #
13 #  +     #12   #B1   #   16   #     #T5      #  # 13
   #  #######     #++####        #     #        #  #
14 #        #     #19   +16 17   #     #      11#  # 14
   #        #####################################  #
15 #            E3                   E3            # 15
   #############++###################++#############
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

How to get here: Take the boat from the Phlan dock to the "B"ay, then enter the
  "N"orth side of the city.

Random encounters: None.

Resting: You may not safely rest if you have not yet cleared the block; three
  thieves will each launch a sling bullet at the party (3 THAC0 10 attacks on
  random characters, 1d4+1 damage per hit).

Clearing the block: To clear this block, you must kill at least 21 thieves in
  combats that count, which are the thief ambushes ("B" on the map) and the
  combats at locations 14, C2 (by way of location 15), and 16.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The layout is identical and the map
  plays much the same way (the tabletop version has a thief count of 18),
  although the Gold Box version has much less powerful spell scrolls.

E1 - Exit to Wilderness (26,27).

E2 - Exit to Wilderness (26,26).

E3 - Exit to Wealthy Area.

B - If you have not cleared the block, when you enter this location a thief
  may ambush you here:
  * 30% chance if the count of thieves killed is less than 12, 35% chance
    otherwise: the thief will backstab one character.  This is a THAC0 -10
    attack that does 2d8 damage if the count of thieves killed is less than 12,
    or 3d8 otherwise.  You cannot retaliate or catch the thief in this case.
  * Otherwise: You catch the thief, and get the option to attack the thief or
    let him go.  If you attack the thief, you fight 1 1ST LVL THIEF (#45) if
    the count of thieves killed is less than 18, or 1 6TH LVL THIEF (#51)
    otherwise (Morale 30 for either).  Winning this combat increases the count
    of thieves killed by 1.
  The backstab does not happen if it is numbered the same as the most recent
  backstab.

T - These squares are trapped.  A thief may roll to detect and disarm the trap,
  with the standard roll.  A failure triggers the trap as follows:
  T3, T5, T6, T8 - "A scything blade drops across the doorway, damaging one of
    the characters."  (THAC0 0 attack on random character, 1d6 damage if it
    hits)
  T4 - "The party hears the cracking of class.  A poisonous gas fills the air!"
    (1d3 damage to random character, saving throw vs. poison negates)
  T7 - "After the party enters the room a net laced with sharp blades falls on
    the party."  (1d6 damage to random character, saving throw vs. spell
    negates)

9 (10,9) - This loot pile worth 400 XP includes a Short Sword +2 and Leather
  Armor +4 among the other nonmagical items.

10 (14,10) - There are three cabinets here; all of them are locked, and cabinet
  C is also trapped.  They contain:
  A - some papers (Journal Entry 23, Journal Entry 14)
  B - 1500 silver (12 XP)
  C - 1800 gold (300 XP) (trap: needle trap, 1 THAC0 -20 attack on random
    character, 1d8 damage if it hits)

11 (14,14) - There is a pile of 26 huge tapestries and 2 fine tapestries here
  (they are very heavy and not worth that much).

12 (3,13) - A wooden cabinet is here.  It is trapped; if your thief fails to
  deal with the trap, every party member must save vs. poison or take 2d6
  damage.  You must then bypass its lock; when done, within is a treasure worth
  666 XP:
    Magic-User Scroll (Fireball, Haste, Hold Person)
    Magic-User Scroll (Blink, Ray of Enfeeblement, Slow)
    Clerical Scroll (Hold Person, Cure Blindness, Bestow Curse)
    Clerical Scroll (Prayer, Remove Curse, Animate Dead)
    Magic-User Scroll (Reduce, Detect Invisibility, Fireball)
    Magic-User Scroll (Burning Hands, Mirror Image, Blink)

13 (6,7) - There are four caskets here; all of them are both trapped and
  locked.  They contain:
  A - 12 gems (500 XP) (trap: poison needle does 1d4 damage to one character,
        saving throw vs. poison negates)
  B - 1 jewelry (366 XP) (trap: poison dart does 1d3 damage to one character)
  C - 3 gems (125 XP) (trap: poison powder does 1d6 damage to every character,
        saving throw vs. poison negates)
  D - 20 gems (833 XP) (trap: volley of darts launched at party: 12 THAC0 10
        attacks on random characters, 1d4 damage per hit)

14 (3,4) - There is a pile of weapons and armor here.  You can search them for
  traps, which is a standard thief Find/Remove traps roll, or is automatic with
  the Detect Traps spell.  Disarming the trap is also a standard thief Find/
  Remove traps roll.

  If you fail to disarm the trap, or simply tried to take the treasure, you set
  off an ambush trap that depends on the count of thieves killed:
  * 0...7: fight 5 6TH LVL THIEF (#51).
  * 8...12: fight (kills-7) 1ST LVL THIEF (#45) and (12-kills) 6TH LVL THIEF
      (#51).
  * 13...17: some very strange things happen that aren't well-defined.  In
      programming terms, with 13 to 15 kills an integer underflow occurs, and
      you may have to fight a large number of level 1 thieves.  With 16 or 17
      kills, the game dereferences a stale pointer when defining the number of
      level 1 thieves.
  * 18 or more: There aren't enough thieves left for an ambush; this acts as
      if you had disarmed the trap.
  The thieves surprise you (Morale undefined).  If you fought a combat with 0
  to 15 thief kills beforehand, this increases the count of thieves killed by
  5.

  However the ambush is resolved, the treasure is worth 600 XP and contains 2
  Daggers +1, Hammer +1, Morning Star +1, Scimitar +1, Short Sword +1, Shield
  +2, Chain Mail +1, and Broad Sword -2.

15 (6,5) - "As you enter the room two thieves come out of nowhere and attack
  the party.  They fail miserably and run out the east door."  If you give
  chase, they split up at location C1 (9,8):
  * If you follow the thief that headed "E"ast, you end up at location C2
    (13,5), where you can fight the thief handled the same as a backstab marked
    B.
  * Following the thief that headed "S"outh will lead you into the ambush at
    location 16.

16 - In the first of these locations you enter, you are surprised by 15 1ST LVL
  THIEF (#45) and 3 6TH LEVEL THIEF (#51) (Morale 60, 263 XP).  This combat
  counts as 15 kills towards clearing the block, not 18; it will also not
  disappear just because you have otherwise cleared the block.

17 (8,14) - There are some files here (Journal Entry 38, Journal Entry 51).

18 (10,12) - "You enter a room that has been converted to a jail.  There are
  ten young thugs beating an older thief to death.  Once you enter they stop
  and attack you."  Fight 10 1ST LEVEL THIEF (#45) (Morale undefined, 23 XP).
  After you win, the old thief dies, but not before giving you some papers
  (Journal Entry 48).  This combat does not count towards clearing the block.

19 (5,14) - "On a nearby wall is a slate.  Drawn on the slate is a complex maze
  with the words 'NW Castle' under it."  (Journal Entry 41)

20 (4,5) - "On the floor is a crude map.  It is a map of a complex maze with
  the words 'NE Castle' under it."  (Journal Entry 29)

SECTION 6.11.1 - Wealthy Area Overview
--------------------------------------

Plot background:

This was once the home of old Phlan's wealthy, but it is now occupied by orcish
patrols from the adjacent Temple of Bane.

Strategy:

Visit location 4 with Search mode on, then defeat the orcs there to clear this
block.  There's not much else.

SECTION 6.11.2 - Wealthy Area Details
-------------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 24
   #############++###################++#############
 0 #     #     #E2#     +     #     #E2#    #      #  0  KEY:
   #     #     #  #     #     #     #  #    #      #
 1 #     +     #  #     #     #     #  #    +      #  1  # wall
   #++####     #  #     #++####     #  #++##########     + door/archway
 2 #     #     #  #     +  +        #           #  #  2
   #  ##########  #######++####++####           #  #     E Entrance/exit
 3 #  +                                         +  #  3  M Mansion
   ####                                         ####     X going south from
 4 +E3                                           E1+  4    here causes a crash
   #######        ############################++####
 5 #     #        #    1+ 2      # 3      #    4   #  5
   #     #        #     #        #    M   #        #
 6 #     +        #     #       2+ 3  3  3+ 4  M   #  6
   #     #        #     #############++####        #
 7 #     #        #    1   #              #        #  7
   ##########     ####++####  #######     ####++####
 8 #        #     #    6   #  #     #     #    7   #  8
   #        #     #        #  #     #     #        #
 9 #        +     #        #  #  M  +     #        #  9
   #        #     #        #  #     #     #        #
10 #        #     #        #  #     #     #        # 10
   ##########     ##########  ####++#     ##########
11 +E3                                           E1+ 11
   #######++################++#######        #######
12 #  +        +  #     #    9   #  #        #     # 12
   #  #        #  #     ####++####  #######  #     #
13 #  #        #  #     +     +     ####  #  #     # 13
   #######++##########++#     ####++####  #++#++####
14 #     #     +  #     #     #   10####     #     # 14
   #     #     #  #     ####++#     ####     #     #
15 #     +     # X#12   +     +10   ####     +     # 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

How to get here: Take the boat from the Phlan dock to the "B"ay, then enter the
  "S"outh side of the city.

Random encounters: The odds of a random encounter are 1 in 20 normally, or 1 in
  6 if you are in Search mode.  They continue to appear until both this block
  and the Temple of Bane have been cleared.

  A random encounter has a 40% chance of being a special orc patrol: "You see a
  group of four orcs whose shields bear a black hand on a red field."  Surprise
  is not rolled for.  If you "P"arley:
  * "H"aughty or "A"busive: "In a deep threatening voice one of the orcs says
    'You moles better watch your step or you shall feel the wrath of Bane!'
    After saying this he spits and leaves."
  * "N"ice or "M"eek: "The orcs yell out, 'We have orders to check out
    suspicious individuals, but youse guys look harmless enough.'  After
    talking the four orcs wander away."
  * "S"ly: "One of the orcs says, 'Oh, yeah youse them guys who know where de
    treasure is.  We not supposed to kill you yet.'  The orcs then wander
    away."
  They will not fight unless forced to; if defeated in combat, they carry 6
  Leather Holy Symbol (of Bane).

  The rest of the time, monsters are chosen from the following table.
                                Base  Par  Lead  Lead
    Prob  Div  Base Monster   Morale  Mod  Thr.  Mult  Leader Monster   Move
    ----  ---  ------------   ------  ---  ----  ----  --------------   ----
     20%    1  GOBLIN GUARD (#2)  50   20    40     5  GOBLIN LEADER (#3)  6
     20%    1  ORC (#4)           55   10    30     4  ORC LEADER (#5)     9
     10%    2  HOBGOBLIN (#6)     60   10    20     3  HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7)  9
     10%    6  OGRE (#8)          80    0    11     1  OGRE LEADER (#9)    9
   The number of monsters is calculated thusly:
   1. Divide Party Strength by Div, rounding down, with a minimum of 4.
   2. Possibly divide again:
        * 60% chance: divide by 3, rounding down
        * 30% chance: divide by 2, rounding down
        * 10% chance: no further division
   3. If the number of base monsters is at least equal to Lead Thr, there are
      also monster leaders, numbered equal to the lowest integral multiple of
      Lead Mult that would be enough to lower base monsters below Lead Thr.
      (This is not actually deducted from number of base monsters.)
   4. The number of base monsters is then capped at 56 minus the number of
      monster leaders.

  Par Mod is the parley modifier of this group.
  Move is movement, for determining success of "F"lee; this is compared to the
    movement of your slowest party member.

  Surprise is rolled for the party and the monsters.
  * Party and monsters both not surprised: Distance is 2.
  * Party surprised, monsters not: Distance is 0; the monsters attack
    immediately.
  * Party not surprised, monsters surprised: Distance is 2.
  * Party and monsters both surprised: Distance is 0; the monsters attack if
    you attempt to "P"arley.

  If you "P"arley when you are not surprised, add together the following:
    * 4 for "M"eek; 29 for "H"aughty, "S"ly, or "N"ice; 59 for "A"busive
    * 1d31
    * The current character's Charisma reaction modifier
    * The parley modifier for the appropriate monsters
  Then if this score is:
  * 74 or below: "The monsters scream 'Oh yeah, well I guess were just
    gonna have to teach youse guys a lesson or two.'"  The monsters attack.
  * 75...99: "'Get outa here before we make you leave', the monsters yell.
    'And you wont come back if you know whats good fer ya.'  The monsters then
    leave."
  * 100...139: "'We gotta keep all you nonbelievers outa here', the monsters
    say as they begin to leave.  'So hit the road ya bums.'  The monsters turn
    and leave."
  * 140 or higher: "You intimidate the monsters so much they run away!"

Resting: It is not safe to rest anywhere until you have cleared both this block
  and the Temple of Bane; it is then safe to rest anywhere.  If you are
  disturbed (50% chance every 20 minutes), it will always be an attack by 10
  ORC (#4) (Morale undefined, 23 XP).

Clearing the block: The council will consider this block cleared once you have
  fought the combat in any mansion marked M.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: In the tabletop version, this isn't
  connected to the Temple of Bane mission; the only real quests are to clear
  the block of monsters and recover family heirlooms from the mansions here.
  The map is similar but not identical.

All experience rewards listed are for a 7-person party (it is assumed you have
Dirten with you).

E1 - Exit to Wilderness (26,27).

E2 - Exit to Kovel Mansion.

E3 - Exit to Temple of Bane.

M - The first time you enter any one of these mansions, you are confronted by
  ORC (#4) (20 if you have encounter a four-orc patrol and let it live, 10
  otherwise) (Morale 99, 46 XP for 20, 23 XP for 10).  They attack immediately
  if you do not have a Leather Holy Symbol; otherwise they act surprised, but
  you will end up fighting them if you do anything other than run away.

1 - "You are in a room filled with rubble and waste."  If you are in Search
  mode when you enter this location, you may find a tapestry (which is heavy
  and not that valuable).

2 - "You are in the remains of a once great dining room.  Furniture lies burned
  and broken throughout the room."  If you are in Search mode when you enter
  this location, you may find 3 jewelry (942 XP).

3 - "Before you is a great hall.  The floor is littered with orc trash and the
  walls have crude black hands painted on them."  If you are in Search mode
  when you enter this location, you may find a trap door concealing a hidden
  treasure: Clerical Scroll (Animate Dead, Cure Blindness), Potion of Extra
  Healing, and Ring of Feather Falling (285 XP).

4 - "You are in a room that is filled with the dead bodies of the orcs'
  previous victims."  If you are in Search mode when you first enter this
  location, you may find 3 jewelry (942 XP).  You cannot find this treasure
  otherwise.

6 (6,8) - "As you enter the room you see six orcs led by a large ogre.  They
  lunge forward and attack."  Fight 6 ORC (#4) and 1 OGRE (#8) (Morale 80, 42
  XP).  They are carrying a piece of paper (Journal Entry 53).

7 (14,8) - "In this room are some goblin slaves that are cowering in the
  corner.  They all scream 'Please don't kill us.'"  Killing them is automatic
  and doesn't result in combat or XP (you meanie); if you "L"et them go, "As
  they leave one of them says 'To enter the temple you need a holy symbol of
  Bane.'"

9 (8,12) - "You enter into a filthy room.  Eight orc guards attack you
  immediately."  Fight 6 ORC (#4) and 2 ORC LEADER (#5) (Morale 80, 29 XP).

10 - This room has some crude beds; if you search you are attacked by 8 ORC
  (#4) (Morale 80, 18 XP).

12 (5,15) - "On the wall here is a poorly scratched out message.  You can
  barely make out the words: 'North wall.  Ri  t front glas . Se'"  It does not
  mean anything, according to the clue book.

SECTION 6.12.1 - Temple of Bane Overview
----------------------------------------

Plot background:

The old Temple of Ilmater is now occupied by orcish forces who have rededicated
it to the evil god Bane.  The temple is currently led by the half-orc cleric
Mace.  The council of Phlan is interested in defeating Mace and reclaiming the
temple for the gods of good.

Strategy:

You can enter the temple peacefully if you either carry at least one leather
holy symbol (of Bane), or parleyed with a randomly-encountered four-orc patrol.

Go straight for the temple and search for the three treasures at locations 1,
2, and 3.  Be ready for the big attack that will come after you find the last
treasure.

SECTION 6.12.2 - Temple of Bane Details
---------------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 24
   #################################################
 0 #     #     #     +     #  +     #     +        #  0  KEY:
   #     #     #######     #++#############        #
 1 #     +     #     #     #              #        #  1  # wall
   ##########++#     #++####              #++#######     + door/archway
 2 #     +                                   #     #  2
   ####++#           ################        #     #     E Entrance/exit
 3 #     #           #              #        +     #  3
   #######        ####     ####     ####     #######
 4 #  #           ####     ####        #         E1+  4
   #  #        #######     ####        #############
 5 #  +        #### 1                        #######  5
   ####     #######  ####  ####  ####  ####  #######
 6 #  +     #                                      #  6
   #  #     #        #  #  #  #  #  #  #        ####
 7 #  #   E2+        #  #  #  #  #  #  #       7####  7
   ####     #        #  #  #  #  #  #  #        ####
 8 #  #   E2+        #  #  #  #  #  #  #       7####  8
   #  #     #        #  #  #  #  #  #  #        ####
 9 #  +     #                            3         #  9
   ####     #######  ####  ####  ####  ####  #######
10 #  +        ####                          ####### 10
   #  #        #######     ####        #############
11 #  #           ####     ####        #         E1+ 11
   #######        ####     ####     ####     #######
12 #     #           #          2   #        +     # 12
   #     #           ################        #     #
13 #     +                                   #     # 13
   #     #        #++####     #++#           ####++#
14 #     #        #     #     #  #           #     # 14
   #######++####++#     #++####  #######++#######  #
15 #  +        #  #     #     #  +     #        #  # 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Random encounters: Encounters are identical to those in the Wealthy Area (q.v.)
  except that you will not be bothered in the central actual temple building if
  Mace is letting the party search for the treasures inside.

Resting: Same as for the Wealthy Area.

Clearing the block: The council will consider this block cleared once you have
  defeated Mace.  It does not matter whether or not you have Dirten present for
  this.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The temple encounters work much the
  same way, but the magical treasure is far less valuable in the Gold Box
  version (mostly because most high-level spells aren't implemented here).

All experience rewards listed are for a 7-person party (it is assumed you have
Dirten with you).

E1 - Exit to Wealthy Area.

E2 [location 4] - "You stand in front of the entrance to a large shadowy
  temple.  An old blind decrepit orc stands outside with eight orc guards."
  * If you have encountered at least one of the special four-orc patrols
    non-violently:
    You will automatically be admitted entry: "As you approach, they move,
    allowing you entrance into the temple."  This is intended to be a trap;
    Mace wants the party to search the temple for hidden treasure, then attack
    the party himself to claim the treasures.
  * Otherwise:
    The orcs do not know about your party, so you are not automatically allowed
    entry.  The blind orc will check for the presence of at least one Leather
    Holy Symbol (of Bane).  If you have one, he will let you in if you permit
    him to search your party.  Otherwise, you will have to attack the temple
    guards of 8 ORC (#4) (Morale 99, 18 XP) to gain entry to the temple.

  If you have entered the temple and attempt to leave, that will trigger the
  combat with Mace and his followers described below if it has not already
  happened.

1/2/3 - These three locations have treasures beneath hidden trap doors, which
  you can find by searching.  Mace wants you to find these for them, then
  ambush you to get the treasures himself.  The treasures are as follows:
    1 - 342 XP; Clerical Scroll (Animate Dead, Cause Disease, Prayer), Clerical
      Scroll (Snake Charm, Silence 15' Radius, Bless), Magic-User Scroll
      (Fireball, Ray of Enfeeblement, Stinking Cloud).
    2 - 800 XP; Potion of Giant Strength, Potion of Healing, Potion of Speed,
      Wand of Magic Missiles (20 charges), Dust of Disappearance, plus some
      nonmagical items.  (The Dust of Disappearance is an extremely powerful
      consumable item -- don't waste it!)
    3 - 457 XP; Hand Axe +1, Dagger +1, Hammer +1, Mace +1, Morning Star +1,
      Scimitar +1, Spear +1, Short Sword +1.
  After you find the third of these treasures, you will be immediately attacked
  by MACE (#33) leading 30 ORC (#4), 20 ORC (#44), and 5 ORC LEADER (#5)
  (Morale 99, 256 XP), unless Mace has already been defeated.  (Note that some
  of these orcs are "elite" orcs armed with short bows.)  Mace is carrying a
  Mace +1 and a notice recorded as Journal Entry 25.  If Dirten is with the
  party, he will leave your party after this battle.

  You can choose to favor either choke points, or wide-open spaces for casting
  Fireball, depending on where you search for the last treasure.  The orcs are
  easily dispatched with Fireball, but enough orcs are armed with bows that
  they can be a problem for lower-level parties.

7 - "In front of you is an altar that is smeared with blood and covered with
  crude black hand prints."  If you "D"estroy altar, and you have not already
  defeated Mace, he attacks immediately.  (The orcs receive no Morale bonus as
  the clue book suggests.)

SECTION 6.13.1 - Wilderness Overview
------------------------------------

Plot background:

The wilderness near Phlan is not extensive enough that it has any other
significant town or city, but it does have a variety of places you can
adventure in, plus the inevitable random encounters.

Strategy:

Wilderness combats can be very large, can feature dangerous monsters, and
lack choke points, all for little reward; outdoors combat should thus be
avoided unless you seek a challenge.

If the current character has high Charisma, you can avoid combat with sapient
monsters by parleying with an "N"ice attitude in the Western Wilderness, or an
"A"busive attitude in the Central or Eastern Wilderness.

The dangerous monsters are:
* Western Wilderness: giant snakes have a deadly poison attack.
* Central Wilderness: driders cast spells including Fireball.
* Eastern Wilderness: wyverns and phase spiders both have deadly poison
  attacks.

SECTION 6.13.2 - Wilderness Details
-----------------------------------

             1111111111222222222233333333334444  KEY:
   01234567890123456789012345678901234567890123
 0                                               . plains
 1                                               " swamp
 2   ...&&&^^&&&&&&&&&&&&&&..&&&&&&&&&&&&&&&&    + forest
 3   &&&^^^^^^^&&^^^^&^^&&&&..&&&&&&&&&&&&&&&    & hills
 4   &^^^^^^^^^&&^^^^^^^^&&&&..&&&&&&&&&&&&&&    ^ mountains
 5   ^^^^^^^^^&&&^^^^^^^^^&&&.&&&&&&&&&&&&&&&    ~ river (the Stojanow is not
 6   ^^^^^^^^&&&^^^^^^^^^^&&&..&&&&&&&&+&+&&&        passable below Lake Kuto
 7   ^^^^^^^^&^^^^^^^^^^^&&&&.&&&&&&&&+++++&&        until you defeat Yarash)
 8   ^^^^^^^^&&^^^^^^^^^&&&....&&&&&&+++m++&&    = impassably large body of
 9   ^^^^^^^^k&^^^^^^^^&&&&....&&&&&&+++++&&&        water (Lake Kuto or the
10   ^^^^^^^^&&^^&&&&&&.&&......&&&&&&+++&&&&        Moonsea)
11   ^^^^^^^^&~&&&&&&++.....h....&&&&&&&&&&&&
12   ^^^^^^^^&&~~~~+++++....++......&&&&&&&&&    The in-game view shows a 5x5
13   &&^^^^^&&&&&&&~+++++..++++.....&&&&&&&&&    area centered upon your party.
14   &&&^^^&&&&&..++~+f+++.+++++...&&&&&&&&&&
15   .&&&&&.&&&..+++====++++++++..&l&&&&&&&&&    (NB: terrain that is not
16   ..........+++++==g=.+++++++++.&~&&&&&&&&    water has no effect other than
17   .........+++++++===..+++++++++.~~&&&&&&&    appearance)
18   .........+++++++.~~...++++++++..~~&&&&&&
19   ....""...++++++..~~...++++++++..&~&&&&&&
20   ....""....+++++..~....+++++++++.&~~&&&&&
21   ...."".....++++..~~...+++++++++.&~&&&&&&
22   ....""".....+++.++~~...+++++++&&&~&&&&&&
23   ....."".....++.+++.~...+++++++&&&~&..&&&
24   ....."j"......+++++~~...++++++&~~~&...&&
25   ....."""......+++++.~~~.+++++++~&...+++&
26   ....."".......++++++..~cc++++++~.++++++=
27   .....""........+++++++.ab.++.++~+++++===
28   .....""........+++++++d==.....+~~~~=====
29   ....."".........++e++++=========~e======
30   ....."".....==.=====+===================
31   ..........n=============================
32   .i........==============================
33   =.=====.================================
34   ========================================
35   ========================================
   01234567891111111111222222222233333333334444
             0123456789012345678901234567890123

Random encounters: There are three different sets of random encounters and
  lairs; which set depends on your current X coordinate.  (Land terrain makes
  no difference.)  You can often avoid combat in random encounters with
  intelligent monsters by parleying; the effect of attitude varies by monster
  set.

  The chance of a random encounter is 5%.  A random encounter is with monsters
  20 in 21 times, and is a lair entrance 1 in 21 times.  The possible lairs
  have equal probability, and are described in the next section.

  "W"ait will always avoid combat if your party is not surprised and the
  monsters are.  It otherwise always results in combat.

  "F"lee can only work if neither side is surprised ("You spot a group of
  <monsters>.")

  To find the effect of a "P"arley, if the monster has a parley receptiveness
  other than 0 (always hostile) or 50 (always friendly), add together the
  following (surprise does not matter):
    * Parley receptiveness
    * Parley attitude modifier for that monster set
    * The current character's Charisma reaction modifier
    * 1d31
  If the result is:
    * 99 or less: The monsters are insulted and attack.
    * 100...139: "You convince the <monsters> that combat is not necessary and
      you go on your way."
    * 140 or more: "The <monsters> fall for your sparkling personality and
      wander away without a fight."

  Monster tables explanation:
    Fr Frequency (chance out of 19 for Western; 18 for Central; 20 for Eastern)
    Di Divisor: the base number of monsters is equal to Party Strength divided
       by this, rounded down.  This is subject to a random additional division:
       * 1 in 6 chance: no extra divisor
       * 3 in 6 chance: divided by 2
       * 2 in 6 chance: divided by 3
       The mininum number of monsters is 1.
    Mo Morale
    Pa Parley receptiveness: 0 is always hostile, 50 is always friendly,
       intermediate values work as above.
    Mv Movement: if "F"leeing is possible, the chance of that succeeding is
       this compared to the movement of your slowest party member.  (It isn't
       necessarily its actual combat movement.)
    Re Size reduction: if the base monster group is at least as large as this,
       this will be subtracted until it is smaller than this number; one
       additional "extra monster" will be added for each subtraction.

  Western Wilderness (X=2 to X=15, ECL Script 25):
    Fr  Base Monster           Di  Mo  Pa  Mv  Re  Extra Monster
    --  ---------------------  --  --  --  --  --  ---------------------
     2  QUICKLINGS (#10)        4  60  10  96
     3  WILD BOAR (#120)        4  60   0  15
     1  GIANT MANTIS (#74)     10  60   0  12
     3  TIGER (#119)            6  60   0  12
     2  THRI-KREEN (#118)      10  60  30  18
     1  AHNKHEG [sic] (#65)     8  60   0  12
     2  CENTAUR (#67)           4  60  50  18
     2  CORPORAL (#54)          2  80  10   6  10  CORPORAL (#54)
     1  1ST LVL THIEF (#45)     2  40  10  12  40  6TH LVL THIEF (#51)
     2  GIANT SNAKE (#60)       8  60   0  15

    Quicklings cannot be surprised.
    The party is surprised by giant mantises on a roll of 1 to 5.
    Tigers and corporals are only surprised on a roll of 1.

    "P"arley modifiers:  Haughty     Sly    Nice    Meek Abusive
                         ---------------------------------------
                              19       9      49      -1      29

    The western wilderness has four possible lairs: (1) wild boar, (2) anhkheg,
    (3) thri-kreen, and (4) giant snake.

  Central Wilderness (X=16 to X=28, ECL Script 26):
    Fr  Base Monster           Di  Mo  Pa  Mv  Re  Extra Monster
    --  ---------------------  --  --  --  --  --  ---------------------
     4  KOBOLD (#123)           1  40  30   6  40  KOBOLD LEADER (#1)
     2  DISPLACER BEAST (#68)   6  60   0  15
     1  DRIDER (#69)            7  60   1  12
     3  STIRGE (#61)            2  60   0  18
     3  LIZARDMAN (#57)         3  50  20   6
     1  BANDIT (#97)            2  60  20   9  20  AIDES (#53)
     2  NOMAD (#40)             1  60  50   9  30  AIDES (#53)
     2  MERCHANT (#98)          1   0  50   9  30  AIDES (#53)

    "P"arley modifiers:  Haughty     Sly    Nice    Meek Abusive
                         ---------------------------------------
                              29      29      29       4      59

    The central wilderness has three possible mini-maps: (1) grove with pool,
    (2) ruined huts, and (3) grove with stirges.

   Eastern Wilderness (X=29 to X=41, ECL Script 27):
     Fr  Base Monster           Di  Mo  Pa  Mv  Re  Extra Monster
     --  ---------------------  --  --  --  --  --  ---------------------
      4  KOBOLD (#0)             1  40  30   6  40  KOBOLD (#0)
      3  GNOLL (#73)             2  50  20   9
      3  LIZARDMAN (#57)         3  60  20   6
      2  GIANT LIZARD (#59)      4  50   0  15
      2  HIPPOGRIFF (#113)       4  70   0  18
      1  WYVERN (#121)           8  70   0  24
      2  TROLL (#31)             7  60  10  12
      1  PHASE SPIDER (#116)     6  70   0  31
      2  MINOTAUR (#62)          7  70  10  12

     "P"arley modifiers:  Haughty     Sly    Nice    Meek Abusive
                          ---------------------------------------
                               19      19       4       4      29

    The eastern wilderness has four possible lairs: (1) wyvern, (2) giant
    lizard, (3) gnoll, and (4) kobold.

Resting: Every 8 hours, rest outdoors has a 10% chance of being disturbed by a
  non-lair random encounter appropriate for where you are.

a (25,27) - Phlan.  You can step freely on this square as if nothing were here.

b (26,27) - East of Phlan.  You can choose to enter Phlan to:
  * the "N"orth, to Kovel Mansion (15,4)
  * the "S"outh, to Wealthy Area (15,4)
  * via "B"oat, to the Civilized Area (15,1)

c (25,26) and (26,26) - North of Phlan.  You can choose to enter Phlan via:
  * the northern "C"ity gates of Phlan, to Kovel Mansion (4,0)
  * the "G"raveyard, to Valhingen Graveyard (0,4)

d (24,28) - West of Phlan.  You can choose to enter Phlan to:
  * the "N"orth, to Podal Plaza (0,4)
  * the "S"outh, to Cadorna Textile House (0,4)

e (20,29) and (35,29) - A boat here can take you back to the Civilized Area
  (15,1) of New Phlan.

f (19,14) - A rowboat is hidden here next to the lake; you can take it to
  Sorcerer's Island at (19,16).

g (19,16) - Yarash's Pyramid stands before you on Sorcerer's Island.  You may:
  * "E"nter, to Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 (15,0)
  * "G"o back to (19,14)

h (25,11) - Entrance to Nomad Camp (1,14).

i (3,32) - Entrance to Zhentil Keep Outpost (7,0).  You may only enter if you
  have received the diplomatic mission here.  Otherwise, you are challenged by
  guards who demand that you leave; failure to do so results in combat with 12
  CORPORAL (#54) (Morale undefined, 92 XP), and nothing further happens.

j (8,24) - The first time you enter this square you are attacked by 2 AHNKHEG
  [sic] (#65) (Morale 90, Distance 1, 143 XP).

k (10,9; ECL Script 19) - As you first approach this square, you see a dragon
  flying into a lair.  If you "E"nter the cave, the silver dragon Diogenes asks
  you to "S"tate name and intent or leave.  If you do the former, you will be
  asked for your reason for being here:
  * Ask dragon for advice, Pledge party to dragon's service or Offer gift:
    Diogenes appears, greets you, and asks that you retrieve a silver bottle
    from the kobold complex far to the east, then return for another quest.
  * Challenge evil leader of old Phlan: Diogenes appears, upset that you
    misidentified him.  If you "A"pologize, you get the same result as asking
    for advice.  If you "S"lay the dragon, he leaves in disgust; if you then
    "F"ollow" him then "A"ttack, every party member must save vs. breath weapon
    or take 11d6 damage.  (This might be the only place in the game where you
    take cold damage, except the game engine doesn't support typed damage
    outside of combat.)
  (Incidentally, the real historical Diogenes was a hilarious character.)

l (32,15) - Kobold Caves.  Every time you approach the caves without them being
  cleared, you are attacked by 25 KOBOLD (#0) and 5 KOBOLD LEADER (#1) (Morale
  50).  There are two entrances, a "L"arge entrance to Kobold Caves (10,0) and
  a "S"mall entrance to Kobold Caves (6,0).

m (37,8) - Entrance to Lizardman Keep (8,14).

n (12,31) - Entrance to Buccaneer Base (0,8).  This does not show up on the map
  at all until you accept the commission to rescue the heir to Bivant, and you
  may not re-enter the base once that has been resolved one way or the other.

SECTION 6.14.1 - Wilderness Lairs Overview
------------------------------------------

Strategy:

Lairs are all optional.

Some Western Wilderness and Eastern Wilderness lairs have one random magical
item.  These may be repeatedly found, and are the only repeatably lootable
random magical items in the game.

SECTION 6.14.2 - Wilderness Lairs Details
-----------------------------------------

Every monster lair always regenerates encounters and treasure any time you
re-enter one from the Wilderness.

The automap will not work in any lair.

Random encounters: There are no random encounters in any lair.

Resting: Resting is always safe in any lair.

    15  0  1  2  3  4  5     Western Wilderness, Wild Boar Lair
      ####     ##########
 0    # 1#     #        # 0  ECL Script 25
      #  #######  ####  #
 1    #           #  #  # 1  KEY:
      ####  ####  #  #  #
 2       #  ####  #  # 2# 2  # wall
   #######  ####  #  ####
 3 # E      ####  #       3  E Entrance/exit
   #############  #######
 4    # 3#              # 4
      #  #######  ####  #
 5    #  #######  ####  # 5
      #  #######  ####  #
 6    #              #  # 6
      ###################
    15  0  1  2  3  4  5

E (15,3) - Exit to Wilderness.

1 (0,0) - "Out of the shadows, two large wild boars charge."  Fight 2 WILD BOAR
  (#120) (Morale undefined, 52 XP).

2 (5,2) - "Near you is a large, wild boar sow feeding her young.  As you near
  she growls a warning to stay away."  If you "A"pproach, fight 1 WILD BOAR
  (#120) (Morale 100, 26 XP) which receives a -4 penalty to-hit.

3 (0,4) - "At the end of the passageway are three large wild boars.  They
  charge at you and attack!"  Fight 3 WILD BOAR (#120) (Morale undefined, 78
  XP).


     4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15  0     Western Wilderness, Anhkheg Lair
         ##########  ###################
 0       #        #  #  # 4            #    0  ECL Script 25
   ####  #  ####  ####  #######  ####  #
 1 # 6#  #  ####              #  ####  #    1  KEY:
   #  #  #  #######  #######  #  ####  ####
 2 #  #  #     ####  ####  #  # 4#       E# 2  # wall
   #  ####     ####  ####  #  ####  #######
 3 #       7        5      #        #       3  E Entrance/exit
   #######  ####     ####  ####     ####
 4       #  ####     ####     #        #    4
         #  #######  ####  ####  #######
 5       #        #        ####  #          5
         #        ####     ####  #######
 6       #        #  #                5#    6
         ##########  ###################
     4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

E (0,2) - Exit to Wilderness.

4 - "Lying on the ground here are the dissolving remains of a dwarf.  He is
  covered in acid."

5 - "The ground here is soft and freshly churned."

6 (4,1) - "The remains of several of the anhkheg's victims.  Amidst the debris
  is some treasure."  Find 1 gem, 500 electrum, 2000 silver, 5000 copper (104
  XP).

7 (6,3) - "From the south, a large anhkheg lunges out and attacks the party."
  Fight 1 AHNKHEG [sic] (#65) (Morale undefined, Distance 1, 71 XP).


     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8      Western Wilderness, Thri-Kreen Lair
   ############################
 7 #               11      #  #  7  ECL Script 25
   #  ################  ####  #
 8 #  #   13      ####  ####  #  8  KEY:
   #  #     ####  ####  ####  #
 9 # E#     ####              #  9  # wall
   ################  ##########
10 #     #     ####  ####     # 10  E Entrance/exit
   ####  ####  ####  ####     #
11    #  ####         12      # 11
   ####  ####     ####  #######
12 #              ####  #       12
   ####  #######  ####  #
13 #  #  #  ####        #       13
   #  #  #  ####  ####  #
14 #  #  #        ####  #       14
   #  ####  ####  ####  #
15 #        #  #        #       15
   ##########  ##########
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8

E (0,9) - Exit to Wilderness.

11 (5,7) - "There are two thri-kreen here.  They block the passage with their
  bodies."  If you "A"ttack, fight 2 THRI-KREEN (#118) (Morale undefined, 604
  XP).

12 (6,11) - "Before you are three thri-kreen warriors.  They attack you
  immediately."  Fight 3 THRI-KREEN (#118) (Morale undefined, 907 XP).

13 (2,8) - "You enter a cave room with four thri-kreen warriors in it.  On the
  floor is a chest with treasure in it.  As you enter they attack."  Fight
  4 THRI-KREEN (#118) (Morale undefined, 1951-2284 XP), carrying a treasure of
  1 jewelry, 3 gems, 1000 gold, 2000 silver, and 1 random magic item.

     7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      Western Wilderness, Giant Snake Lair
         #######  #############
 7       #     #  #       8   #  7  ECL Script 25
         ####  ####  #######  #
 8          #        #######  #  8  KEY:
            #  ####  #######  #
 9          #  ####     ####  #  9  # wall
         ####  ####     ####  #
10       #                    # 10  E Entrance/exit
         #  ####  #######  ####
11       # 8####  #######  #    11
   ####  #  ####  #######  ####
12 #  #  #     #              # 12
   #  ####     #######  ####  #
13 #                 #  ####  # 13
   #  ####  ####  ####  ####  #
14 #  ####  ####  #    9#   10# 14
   #  ####  ####  #     #     #
15 #     #     # E#     #     # 15
   ############################
     7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

E (11,15) - Exit to Wilderness.

8 - "Lying on the floor is a large, shredded snake skin."

9 (13,14) - "A gigantic snake lies in front of you.  It rears and attacks."
  Fight 1 GIANT SNAKE (#60) (Morale undefined, 43 XP).

10 (15,14) - "As you walk into this room a giant snake falls on top of the
  party."  You are surprised by 1 GIANT SNAKE (#60) (Morale undefined, 43 XP).

Central Wilderness, Grove with Pool (ECL Script 26)

2 - "Near you is a pool of water.  Someone or thing is splashing in the pool."
  If you "A"pproach, 'You see some lizard men swimming in the pool.  Upon
  seeing you they attack!'  Fight 6 LIZARDMAN (#57) (Morale undefined, 98 XP).

3 (2,6) - "As you walk through the trees you are ambushed by two displacer
  beasts."  You are surprised by 2 DISPLACER BEAST (#68) (Morale undefined,
  238 XP).

Central Wilderness, Ruined Huts (ECL Script 26)

4 (8,14) - "As you enter the room you see four kobolds chained to the wall.
  One of them says 'Release us, or the lizard men will eat us!'"  If you:
  * "R"elease: "You release the kobolds and they thank you.  One of them says,
    'Watch out for the mutant lizard men, they're killers!'  They then run out
    the door."
  * "A"ttack: "You coldly kill the defenseless kobolds."

6 (9,11) - "You enter a hut that is covered in filth.  Standing in a pool of
  black muck are two horribly mutated lizard men.  They lunge out and attack
  the party."  Fight 2 MUTANT LIZ-MAN (#58) (Morale undefined, 44 XP).

7 (2,11) - "Inside this hut are four lizard men.  They attack you immediately."
  Fight 4 LIZARDMAN (#57) (Morale undefined, 65 XP).

8 (2,15) - "In this room there are four large lizard men.  As you enter one of
  them yells 'Kill' and they attack."  Fight 4 LIZARDMAN (#57) (Morale
  undefined, 65 XP).

Central Wilderness, Grove with Stirges (ECL Script 26)

9 - Every (4n + 1)th time (1st, 5th, 9th ...) you enter one of these squares,
  "A swarm of stirges swoops down and attacks the party!"  Fight -1+1d31
   (minimum 6) STIRGE (#61) (Morale undefined, 46-230 XP).

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7     Eastern Wilderness, Wyvern Lair
   #########################
 0 #           #           # 0  ECL Script 27
   #  #######  #  ####     #
 1 #  #######  # 4####     # 1  KEY:
   #  #######  #######     #
 2 # 2#    1           3   # 2  # wall
   ####  ####              #
 3 # E   ####          3   # 3  E Entrance/exit
   ####  #######  ####     #
 4 #  #        #  ####     # 4
   #  #######  #  ##########
 5 #  #######  #       3   # 5
   #  #######  #######     #
 6 #              #  #     # 6
   ################  #######
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7

E (0,3) - Exit to Wilderness.

1 (2,2) - "Lying here are the partially eaten remains of a halfling."

2 (0,2) - Wyverns' treasure: 3 jewelry, 3 gems, 1000 gold, 2000 electrum, 6000
  silver, 5000 copper, and 1 random magic item (1679-2012 XP).

3 - In the first of these locations you enter, "You have stumbled across a
  ferocious wyvern.  It charges and attacks!"  Fight 1 WYVERN (#121) (Morale
  100, 224 XP) which receives a -2 penalty to-hit.

4 (4,1) - "A terrible wyvern charges to attack the party!"  Fight 1 WYVERN
  (#121) (Morale 100, 224 XP) which receives a -2 penalty to-hit.

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7      Eastern Wilderness, Giant Lizard Lair
   #########################
 7 #        #     #        #  7  ECL Script 27
   #     ####     ####     #
 8 #     #           #     #  8  KEY:
   #     #  ####     #     #
 9 # 7   #  ####     #    6#  9  # wall
   #  ####  ####  #######  #
10 #  ####        #######  # 10  E Entrance/exit
   #  ####        #######  #
11 #       8      ####     # 11
   #     #############     #
12 #     ####       5      # 12
   #     ####        ####  #
13 #        #        ####  # 13
   #  ####  #############  #
14 #  ####     #           # 14
   #  ##########  ####  ####
15 #    9         #  # E#    15
   ################  ####
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7

E (6,15) - Exit to Wilderness.

5 (5,12) - "Four giant lizards run up and attack the party!"  Fight 4 GIANT
  LIZARD (#59) (Morale 60, 82 XP).

6 (7,9) - "This room is filled with human bones."

7 (0,9) - "You enter a chamber with four giant lizards and two minotaurs.  The
  minotaurs order the lizards to attack."  Fight 4 GIANT LIZARD (#59) and 2
  MINOTAUR (#62) (Morale 70, 304 XP).

8 (2,11) - "You have found some treasure."  Find 3000 electrum, 4000 silver,
  6000 copper, and 1 random magic item (355-688 XP).

9 (1,15) - "Guarding this chamber are two giant lizards.  As you approach,
  they attack."  Fight 2 GIANT LIZARD (#59) (Morale 100, 41 XP).

     8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      Eastern Wilderness, Gnoll Lair
               #############
 7             # G    13   #  7  ECL Script 27
               #  ####     #
 8             #  ####     #  8  KEY:
   ####  #######  ##########
 9 #  #  #     #     #     #  9  # wall
   #  ####     #     #     #
10 #       G   #     #   12# 10  E Entrance/exit
   ####  #######  #######  #     G Possible encounter with gnolls
11    #  ####     #######  # 11
   ####  ####  ##########  #
12 #       G   ####    G   # 12
   ####  ####  ####  ####  #
13    # G####    G   ####  # 13
   ####  #######  #######  #
14 #   13      #  #       G# 14
   #           #  #        #
15 #           # E#        # 15
   #########################
     8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

E (12,15) - Exit to Wilderness.

G [location 10/11] - Every time you enter one of these squares, there is a 1 in
  8 chance that "You are attacked by some gnolls."  Fight 3+1d31 GNOLL (#73)
  (Morale 60, 41-351 XP).

12 (15,10) - "In this room are the horrid remains of some elves."

13 (9,14) - In the first of these squares you enter, "In this room are some
  gnolls and trolls.  They attack you immediately."  Fight 4 TROLL (#31) and
  12 GNOLL (#73) (Morale 75, 666 XP).

     8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15     Eastern Wilderness, Kobold Lair
   #######  ####  ##########
 0 #     #  # E#  #        # 0  ECL Script 27
   #     ####  ####  ####  #
 1 #    K           K####  # 1  KEY:
   ####  #######     ####  #
 2    #  #######           # 2  # wall
   ####  #######  ####  ####
 3 #              ####  #    3  E Entrance/exit
   ####     ####  ####  ####    K Possible encounter with kobolds
 4    #     ####  ####     # 4
   ####     ####  ####     #
 5 #    K           K      # 5
   ####  #######     ####  #
 6    #  #######     #  #  # 6
   ####  #############  ####
 7 #    K####  #             7
   #     ####  #
 8 #           #             8
   #############
     8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

E (11,0) - Exit to Wilderness.

K [location 15/16] - Every time you enter one of these squares, there is a 1 in
  8 chance that "You are attacked by a group of mad kobolds."  Fight 9+1d41
  KOBOLD (#0), and also 3 KOBOLD LEADER (#1) if at least 40 kobolds were rolled
  (Morale 50, 13-75 XP).

SECTION 6.15.1 - Nomad Camp Overview
------------------------------------

Plot background:

The nomads may possibly join with the Boss.  The council commissions you to
prevent that.  As it happens, the nomads are inclined to be friendly, and
respond well to heroic gestures.

Strategy:

Be friendly to the nomads, then choose to defend them.  Stay within the
tripwire perimeter, and you will face three waves of kobolds with allied
nomads.  The kobolds are not hard to defeat even without Fireball.

(You can also get better magical loot from attacking or betraying the nomads,
if you are feeling evil, but the gain from doing so is not actually that
substantial.)

SECTION 6.15.2 - Nomad Camp Details
-----------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 17
                                       ~~~~~~~~~~~~~
 0                                     ~~~~~~~~~~~~~  0  KEY:
            @           @        @  @  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~
 1                          ///////////~~~~~~~~~~~~~  1  # wall
                     @     @//      ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~     + door/archway
 2                    ////////      ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~  2  ~ water
         @            //            ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~     @ tree
 3                    //               ~~~~~~~~~~~~~  3  / tripwire
            @  @     @//   #++#        ~~~~~~~~~~~~~
 4           ///////////   #  #              ~~~~~~~  4  E party enters here
      @      //            ####              ~~~~~~~     H party's hut
 5           //                              ~~~~~~~  5
            @//   ####        ####  ####     ~~~~~~~
 6           //   +  #        #  #  #  +        ~~~~  6
      @      //   ####        #++#  ####        ~~~~
 7           //                                 ~~~~  7
            @//         #######        ####     ~~~~
 8           //         #     #        #  +     ~~~~  8
             //         #     #        ####     ~~~~
 9           //         #     #                 ~~~~  9
            @//   ####  ####++#              ~~~~~~~
10           //   +  #                       ~~~~~~~ 10
             //   ####  ####        #++#  ~~~~~~~~~~
11           //         +  #        #  #  ~~~~~~~~~~ 11
      @     @//         ####  #++#  ####~~~~~~~~~~~~
12           /////            # H#     ~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 12
               @//            ####  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
13              ///////////         ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 13
         @        @     @//         ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
14   E                   //////////////~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 14
            @              @  @     @  ~~~~~~~~~~~~~
15                                     ~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 15
                                       ~~~~~~~~~~~~~
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

When you first cross the tripwire perimeter, the nomads will approach you
cautiously.

If you choose to attack them outright:
  * Fight 14 NOMAD (#40) (Morale 100, 37 XP).
  * You will soon have two more such encounters; trying to parley at this point
    will no longer work.
  * The fourth encounter is with the nomads' leaders: HASSAD (#42), 1 SHAMAN
    (#43), 5 4TH LVL FIGHTER (#41), 49 NOMAD (#40) (Morale 100, 2817 XP).  The
    nomads receive a special penalty of -2 to-hit, and have a treasure of 5000
    gold.  They are carrying:
    * Hassad: Long Sword +2, Shield +1, Scale Mail +2
    * shaman: Dagger +2, Bracers AC 4 (says AC 2, but actually is AC 4), Wand
      of Magic Missiles (50 charges)
    * fighters (each): Long Sword +1, Chain Mail +1

If you parley, the nomads' chief greets you and invites you to a feast in your
honor.  If you refuse, the nomads are insulted and ask you to leave; failing to
do so results in the same combats as above.  Up to this point, you may choose
to leave and restart the map as if nothing had happened.

If you accept the invitation, the feast proceeds without incident, and the
leader Hassad tells you of dangers all around the wilderness (Journal Entry
55).  He tells you his concern about an incoming attack of kobolds, and begs
you to consider staying to defend the nomads.  You are led to a hut to rest
and consider.  If you choose not to help and actually leave, the kobolds will
kill all the nomads; this will complete the mission, but you will not receive
much reward for this method.

If you stay around the camp, there will eventually be a kobold attack:
  * If you are within the tripwire perimeter, and you have never attacked the
    nomads, 2d7 NOMAD (#40) fight on your side.
  * You fight [(56 - # of nomads) divided by 2, rounded down] each of KOBOLD
    (#0) and KOBOLD (#123) (Morale 80).  Attempting to flee will only delay the
    inevitable fight.

The second wave attacks a few minutes later; this is the same as the first
wave, except that if you attacked the nomads during the first fight, the
kobolds and nomads ally against you.

The third and final wave attacks a few minutes later:
  * If you backstabbed the nomads, you fight 49 KOBOLD (#123) allied with
    HASSAD (#42), 1 SHAMAN (#43), and 5 4TH LVL FIGHTER (#41) (Morale 100).
    The kobolds and nomads receive a special penalty of -1 to-hit, and carry
    8000 gold and the same magical items as above.  This fight cannot be
    avoided.

  * If you heroically did not backstab them, "You see a huge group of kobolds
    moving reluctantly forward under the curses of their leader.  The headman
    walks up and slaps you on the back.  'Well done! What say we finish this
    together?'"

    * If you agree, with the help of HASSAD (#42) and 2 4TH LVL FIGHTER (#41)
      you fight 27 KOBOLD (#0) and 26 KOBOLD (#123) who carry a treasure of
      3000 gold (Morale 50, Distance 2).

      If you win, "The shaman walks up to you.  'You fought as the heroes of
      legend.  A reward was promised and so shall it be.'"  You receive 5000
      gold, a Two-Handed Sword +2, and a Wand of Magic Missiles (35 charges)
      (6133 XP).

    * If you do not agree, "The headman sneers, 'Cowards!'  He turns to the two
      guards still living and yells, 'For Hyrnka!'  He and his two guards
      charge into the pack."

      "As they reach the pack a flurry of arrows strike them.  Undaunted they
      strike.  Kobolds die like flies around these heroes.  A guard falls with
      a score of wounds."

      "Within ten minutes the kobolds break, half their number dead. The chief
      comes back, 'I promised you reward for your aid.  So it shall be... Equal
      to your honor.'"  You receive 500 gold (83 XP).

    In either case, the nomads agree not to join with the Boss.

The council considers the mission satisfied if either Hassad is killed, or you
are rewarded by him for defeating the kobolds.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The map is different, but the
  structure is otherwise similar.

SECTION 6.16.1 - Kobold Caves Overview
--------------------------------------

Plot background:

The kobolds are also considering an alliance with the Boss.  The council
commissions you to prevent that from happening.

Strategy:

Enter using the large entrance; this avoids the trap at location 1.  Defeat the
wyvern at location 17 and collect its treasure at location 26.

If your party is light on strength, you can add Princess Fatima at location 14.
Defeat the three waves of kobolds at location 9, and then the remaining guards
at location 20, before catching up to the kobold king at location 11.  You may
then pick up the treasures at location 12 and 27, though the only truly useful
items are the magic-user scrolls.

SECTION 6.16.2 - Kobold Caves Details
-------------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 13
   #################################################
 0 #15#############     +20      #     +12   #######  0  KEY:
   #++#############~~####        #     ####  #######
 1 #     #     ####  ####        +11   ####27#######  1  # wall
   #     #     ####  ####  #######     ####  #######     ~ illusionary walla
 2 #     #     #        +20#           +     #  ####  2  + door/archway
   ####++#     #        ######################  ####
 3 ####14+13 13+ 9  9  9#  #  #  #  #     +     #18#  3  E Entrance/exit
   ####  #######        #~~#~~#~~#  #     ####  #  #
 4 ####  ####  ~                 #  +     ####  #  #  4
   ####++#######                 #++##########++#  #
 5 #     ####  ~         6a      #     +        #  #  5
   #  #############++####++#######     #     ####  #
 6 #  #######           #  #     +     #     #26   #  6
   #++#######           #  #######++#######++#     #
 7 #        +22    22   #        +19   +     #     #  7
   ####++####++####++##########++####++#++####     #
 8 ####  ####  #   21+     ####  #     +     #17 17#  8
   ####  ####  #######     ####++#############     #
 9 #     +     +     #     +       4+ 5  6+16      #  9
   #     #######++#######++################        #
10 #     ####     #######  ################        # 10
   #  #######     #######++###################     #
11 #  #######     #### 2#        +     #######     # 11
   #  #######++#######  #######++#     #######     #
12 #  #     +     +          3   #     #######     # 12
   ####     ##########  ######################     #
13 ####     ########## 1######################     # 13
   ####     ##########  ######################     #
14 ####              #  ##########                 # 14
   ####     ####  ####++##########  ####           #
15 ####     ####  ####E1##########E1####           # 15
   ###################++##########++################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Special penalties: Many of the rooms and corridors are kobold-sized.  If you
  are in combat against nothing other than kobolds and kobold leaders, then
  THAC0 and movement are both penalized by 2, and the kobolds also receive a
  +2 bonus to-hit.

Traps: The traps here may automatically be bypassed if you are being escorted
  by a kobold.  You can also automatically find them with the Detect Traps
  spell active, or if you are in Search mode and a thief passes a Find/Remove
  Traps roll; you may then have a thief try to bypass the trap with a Find/
  Remove Traps roll.

Random encounters: The chance of a random encounter is 1 in X.  X is normally
  21; add 40 to X if you are not in Search mode; add 100 to X if you have
  fought the combat at location 9.  The random encounter is with 15 KOBOLD
  (#0) and 3 KOBOLD LEADER (#1) (Morale 30).

Fleeing: Your party is moved to one of: (0,12); (6,12); (1,14); (9,11); (7,10);
  (6,11).

Resting: If you entered through the large cavern, you can safely rest there if
  you have not fought the wyvern.  Otherwise, you must defeat the three waves
  of attacks in the throne room at location 9 to rest; even then, for every 8
  hours rest you have a 5% chance of being disturbed.

  If you get disturbed, it is by seven skulking kobolds who each launch rocks
  at the party (7 THAC0 10 attacks on random characters, 1d4+1 damage per hit)
  and retreat into the shadows, without you being able to retaliate.

Clearing the area: For this area to count as cleared, you must visit location
  11, which confirms the death of the kobold king.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The tabletop version has a different
  map with more treasure and only kobolds as enemies.

E1 [location 28] - Exit to Wilderness (32,15).

1 (6,13) - There is pit trap here.  If you do not bypass it, a party member
  falls in a pool of water, losing 20% of both money and light items.

2 (6,11) - If you search the mine tailings here, you will find a kobold's crude
  drawing (Journal Entry 42).

3 (8,12) - "A kobold approaches waving a white flag.  The kobold bows and says,
  'You are quite dangerous, we will pay for a truce.'"

  If you agree, you are led to location 6.  If you do not, it triggers the trap
  here.

  If the kobold triggers the trap, or you come back later and you fail to
  bypass it, a deadfall trap does 2d6 damage to all characters who fail a
  saving throw vs. petrification/polymorph; you are then surprised by 20
  KOBOLD (#0) (Morale 25, 26 XP).

4 (10,9) - There is a net trap here.  If you do not bypass it, you are attacked
  by 20 KOBOLD (#0) (Morale 50, 26 XP) who surprise the party after the trap
  entangles you.

5 (11,9) - There is a spike trap here.  If you do not bypass it, the spikes do
  2d4 damage to one character (save vs. death to avoid, no save for a thief
  failing a disarm roll).

6 (12,9) - If you originally entered this map through the "L"arge cave
  entrance, "A drunken kobold lies here."  If you awaken it, it believes you
  are guests of the king, and asks if you want to be led to him; if you accept,
  you are led to location 6a (7,5).

  If you were led here by the kobold from location 3, you get the option to
  follow it through the door to the east.

9 - Kobold king's throne room.  The first time you enter one of these
  locations, "Before you is a horde of kobolds.  Behind them are two men and an
  ancient kobold on a wooden throne.  One says, 'These men are enemies.  Defeat
  them and my lord shall be most generous.'  The king looks at him, and then at
  you.  He smiles and screams, 'Kill them!'"

  This begins three combats with no breaks for the party:
  * Wave 1: 4 TROLL (#31), 35 KOBOLD (#0), 11 KOBOLD LEADER (#1) (Morale 70,
    618 XP).
  * Wave 2: 5 WILD BOAR (#120), 45 KOBOLD (#0), 8 KOBOLD LEADER (#1) (Morale
    60, 212 XP).
  * Wave 3: 2 ENVOY (#87), 2 TROLL (#31), 2 WILD BOAR (#120), 8 KOBOLD (#0)
    (Morale 100, 767 XP); the Envoys each carry a Two-Handed Sword +2.
  The kobolds launch ballista attacks between waves (7 THAC0 3 attacks on
  random characters, 2d6 damage per hit).  If you defeat all three waves, the
  king flees after the battle.

  Have as many Fireball spells prepared as you can before coming in.  Two is
  enough to win; you can use them in the first two waves, and rely on Stinking
  Cloud to defeat wave 3.  After wave 2, you should spend as much time as
  needed casting Cure Light Wounds to heal your characters and then cast buffs
  for wave 3.  You can also do this after wave 1, but you should stand on the
  trolls' bodies to stop them from reviving.

11 (10,1) - "The king, panicked, has fallen into his own spiked pit and died."
  Discovering this will flag this area as cleared.

12 (12,0) - If you search here, you find a brass bottle.  If you "P"ull it out,
  "As you pull, the stopper comes loose and smoke billows out, forming into a
  giant, reddish humanoid.  'I am the efreeti Samir Ahwahl.  You are not my
  master.  Are you, perchance, vampires?'"
  * If you say "Y"es, that is the same as attacking it: fight 1 EFREETI (#124)
    (Morale 100, 454 XP).
  * If you say "N"o, "'Fools, summon me only when a vampire is near or face my
    wrath.'  He returns to the bottle."  You may then pick up the Efreeti
    Bottle (666 XP).

13 - This barracks has a crude map on the wall (Journal Entry 28).

14 (1,3) - "In this room is a young woman in barbarian finery.  She drops a
  kobold she was strangling when she sees you.  'I am Princess Fatima.'  The
  princess continues."  (Journal Entry 16)  "She offers to join your band."

  You may accept or attack her: PRINCESS FATIMA (#104) (Morale 100).  She will
  leave the party as soon as you leave the map.

15 (0,0) - "This was a prison cell.  Broken bindings and six dead kobolds are
  strewn on the floor."  Princess Fatima just broke out of this cell.

16 (13,9) - There is a steep climb on loose rocks from the large open cavern to
  the narrower ones where the kobolds live.  If you climb here, and you have
  not yet fought the wyvern at location 17, the noise you make draws its
  attention, and it surprises and attacks you here.

17 - In one of these locations you may be attacked by the 1 WYVERN (#121)
  (Morale 100, 224 XP) that lives in the large cavern, if you haven't yet
  defeated it.

18 (15,3) - If you search here, "Hidden in a narrow crevice is an old crippled
  kobold.  It croaks weakly for water."  If you "G"ive it water, "When you give
  it water, it crawls out and tells you its tale."  (Journal Entry 20).

19 (10,7) = "This is the living areas.  Female and child kobolds flee."

20 - The first time you enter this room, you are attacked by the kobold king's
  remaining guards: 3 TROLL (#1), 3 WILD BOAR (#120), 20 KOBOLD (#0), 4 KOBOLD
  LEADER (#1) (Morale 100, 522 XP).

21 (5,8) - "Rats are hung here to age.  Moldy roots lie in piles."

22 - "Here crude tables, littered with bones, are scattered around."

26 (14,6) - "Amongst a nest of logs you find some treasure."  You find 2
  jewelry, 2 gems, 1000 gold, 500 electrum, 1000 silver, 2 random magic items
  (1166-1833 XP).

27 (13,1) - "Strewn across the floor is the accumulated wealth of the kobold
  community."  The treasure contains 2 jewelry, 6 gems, 50000 copper,
  Magic-User Scroll (Charm Person, Protection from Evil, Strength), Magic-User
  Scroll (Friends, Invisibility, Protection from Normal Missiles), and a large
  number of worthless items (1158 XP).

SECTION 6.17.1 - Yarash's Pyramid Overview
------------------------------------------

Plot background:

The mad wizard Yarash does not want his schemes to be disturbed, and secludes
himself with a maze and teleporters on the first floor of his pyramid.  He
seeks to engineer a race of empowered freshwater sahuagin to conquer the
Moonsea region.  He is experimenting on exploited lizardmen, and his
experiments are also massively polluting the Stojanow River.

Strategy:

You never need to enter the level 1 maze.  You can use a series of teleporters
to go to level 3, and defeat Yarash at location 25.  Visit the enslaved
lizardmen at location 24 and be "N"ice to them to free them.  You may then use
the dial at location 26 to use the adjacent teleporter to the three treasure
rooms at locations 19, 20, and 21.

SECTION 6.17.2 - Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 Details
-------------------------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 22
   ##############################################~~#
 0 #Tc   #        #           #  +  #     #     # E#  0  KEY:
   #     ####  #++##########  #  #  #++#  #++#  #  #
 1 #        +  #     #TD   +  +  #  +  #  +  #  #  #  1  # wall
   ####  ####  #  #######  #  ####  #  ####  ####  #     ~ illusionary wall
 2 #  +  #     +        #  #        #        #  #  #  2  + door/archway
   #  ####++## #######++#  #  ####++#  #++####  #  #
 3 #  #        #           #  +  +     #        #  #  3  E Entrance/exit
   #  #  #++#  #  #######++####  ##########++####  #     T Teleporter; if 2nd
 4 #  #  #  #  #  +                 #      13   #  #  4    letter case is:
   #  #  ####  #  #  #++#######     #++##########  #         upper: origin
 5 #  #  #     +  #  #  #  +  +     #           #  #  5      lower: destination
   #  #  ##########  #  ####  #  #++#######++####  #
 6 #  #  ##########  #        #  #        #     #  #  6
   #  #++##########  ##########  #######  #  ####  #
 7 #     ##########              #     +  +  #TA+Tf#  7
   ##############################################  #
 8 #           #  #     #        #     #  ~  #TB+Tl#  8
   #  #++#######++#  ####  #++#  #++#  #  #######  #
 9 #  #                    #  #  #  #  ~  +  #TC#  #  9
   #  ##########++##########  #  #++#++####  #  #  #
10 #  +  #        ~           #  +     #     #  #  # 10
   ####  #  #++####++#######  #  #######  ####  #  #
11 #     #  #      Tb      #  #     #  #  +  #  #  # 11
   #  ####  #  #######++#  #  ####  #  ####  #  #  #
12 #        #        #  #  #     +  #        #  #  # 12
   ####~~####  #++####  #  #++####  #++#######  #  #
13 #           #        +           +        #  #  # 13
   #  ##########  ####  ##########++#######  #  #  #
14 #  #  +  +  #  ####     #           #  +  ~  #  # 14
   #  #  #  #  #  ####++#++#++#######++#++#######  #
15 #  +  #  #  #        #                  12   # E# 15
   ##############################################~~#
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Random encounters: Random encounters only happen in the maze, not in the long
  corridor you start in.  The chance of a random encounter is 1 in 21, or 1 in
  3 if you are in Search mode.

  Random encounters are always hostile, and always Morale 100.  These creatures
  have been lost in the maze long enough to be starving, and seek to kill and
  eat anything they find.  The specific monsters you meet depend on which half
  of the level you are on; each of these 12 encounters can only occur once
  each:

  Northern half (some sources refer to this as the western half):
    (1) 20 STIRGE (#61) (153 XP), movement 18
    (2) 3 DRIDER (#69) (974 XP), movement 12
    (3) 3 MINOTAUR (#62) (332 XP), -1 bonus to be surprised, movement 12
    (4) 3 DIANE (#79) (95 XP), +2 bonus to surprise, movement 12
    (5) 3 KOBOLD (#123) (4 XP), movement 9
    (6) 3 7TH LVL FIGHTER (#80) (314 XP), movement 9

  Southern half (some sources refer to this as the eastern half):
    (1) 3 6TH LVL FIGHTER (#75) (410 XP), movement 6
    (2) 3 DISPLACER BEAST (#68) (357 XP), movement 15
    (3) 3 7TH LVL DW FIGH (#76) (514 XP), movement 6
    (4) 3 LIZARDMAN (#57) (49 XP), movement 6
    (5) 3 7TH LVL THIEF (#77) (2227 XP), movement 12
    (6) 3 DRIDER (#69) (974 XP), movement 12

  If you try to "F"lee, success is determined based on the movement of your
  slowest party member compared to the movement above (which isn't necessarily
  the monster's actual combat movement).  You get a +3 bonus to movement for
  this purpose if you surprise the monsters, and a -3 penalty if the monsters
  surprise you.

Fleeing: Your party is moved to one of:
  * If you are in the northern half: (0,0); (1,3); (8,6); (11,1).
  * If you are in the southern half: (5,11); (1,10); (8,14); (9,8).

Resting: Resting is safe in the long corridor where you start, or on a half of
  the level where you have cleared all six of the random encounters.
  Otherwise, every 10 minutes there is a 33% chance rest is disturbed by one of
  the unfought random encounters.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The maze maps in the tabletop version
  are completely different, and have easier random encounters.

E - Exit to Wilderness (19,16).

TA [location 14] (14,7) - Teleport to Ta, on Level 2 (4,15).  If you throw a
  rock through the portal, you can toggle the destination to and from Tb, on
  Level 1 (5,11).

TB [location 15] (14,8) - Teleport to Tb, on Level 1 (5,11).

TC [location 16] (14,9) - Teleport to Tc, on Level 1 (0,0).

TD [location 17] (6,1) - Teleport to Td, on Level 2 (0,12).

12 (13,15) - A human priest greets you here.  You can attack him and fight 1
  2ND LVL CLERIC (#78), but if you parley with a "N"ice or "M"eek attitude
  repeatedly, each time you do so there is a 1 in 3 chance he will say, 'I have
  a secret. I have chiseled almost all the way through to the outside.  But I
  no longer have the strength to break through. Will you try?'

  If you respond "Y"es, this creates a permanent exit to the Wilderness in the
  southern wall.

13 (13,4) - "You find the corpse of a man.  The body has been stripped of
  weapons and armor, as well as any useful gear."

  If you search it you will find the journal of Tyrmor (Journal Entry 26).

SECTION 6.17.3 - Yarash's Pyramid Levels 2 and 3 Details
--------------------------------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 23
   #################################################
 0 #Tk####     #   26 TL#Tn 20 20#######           #  0  KEY:
   #  ####     #        #        #######  #######  #
 1 #   22+23   +25    27#20 20 20####     #  +  #  #  1  # wall
   #######     #++#     #        ####  ####  #  #  #     ~ illusionary wall
 2 #TJ   #     #  #     #20 20 20#     ####  #  #  #  2  + door/archway
   #++#  #     ###################  #######  #  #  #
 3 #  #  #              #######     #Te#TG Tj#  #  #  3  T Teleporter; if 2nd
   #  #  #     ####++##########  ####  #######  #  #       letter case is:
 4 #Th#  #     #   24   ####     ####  #        #  #  4      upper: origin
   ####  #     #        ####  #######  #  #######  #         lower: destination
 5 #     #     #        ####  #######  #  #######  #  5             (m/n/o also
   #######     #        ####  #######  #  #######  #                origins)
 6 #           #        ####  #        #        #  #  6
   #########################  #  #############  #  #
 7 #######                    #  #############  #  #  7
   #######  ###################  #############  #  #
 8 ####     #           #######  #######        #TI#  8
   ####  ####  #######  #######  #######  ##########
 9 #     ####  #Tm 19#  #######           #17 17 17#  9
   #  #######  #     #  ###################        #
10 #  ~ 1 18#  #19 19#                    #17 17 17# 10
   #  #     #  #     ###################  #        #
11 #  #18  1~  #19 19###################  ~10 17 17# 11
   #  #     #  #####################################
12 #Td#18 18#                                 Tg TE# 12
   ##########~~#  #############~~###################
13 ####      Ti#  ##########    8   ##########To 21# 13
   ####       6#  ##########        ##########     #
14 ####        #  ##########        #######21 21 21# 14
   ####        #  ##########        #######        #
15 ####        #Ta##########        #######21 21 21# 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Random encounters: None.

Fleeing: You always flee to the same location on either level.
  * On Level 2, your party flees to Level 2 (3,8).
  * On Level 3, your party flees to Tk, on Level 3 (0,0).

Resting: It is always safe to rest anywhere.

Clearing the area: The pyramid is considered cleared if you defeat Yarash at
  location 25.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: Level 2 uses a different map; level 3
  uses a similar map.  Yarash is lower level in the Gold Box version because
  the game engine doesn't support spells higher than 3rd level.

TE [location 12] (15,12) - Teleport to Te, on Level 2 (11,3).  If you throw a
  rock through the portal, you can toggle the destination to and from Tf, on
  Level 1 (15,7).

TG [location 13] (12,3) - Teleport to Tg, on Level 2 (14,12).  If you throw a
  rock through the portal, you can toggle the destination to and from Th, on
  Level 3 (0,4).

TI [location 14] (15,8) - Teleport to Ti [location 6], on Level 2 (3,13).

TJ [location 11] (0,2) - Teleport to Tj, on Level 2 (13,3).  If you throw a
  rock through the portal, you can toggle the destination to and from Tk, on
  Level 3 (0,0).

TL [location 16] (6,0) - This teleporter's destination varies depending on the
  setting of the dial at adjacent location 26:
    * Blue: Tl, on Level 1 (15,8)
    * Copper: Tm, on Level 3 (4,9), which has a teleporter back here
    * Silver: Tn, on Level 3 (7,0), which has a teleporter back here
    * Gold: To, on Level 3 (14,13), which has a teleporter back here

1 (1,10) - "You have entered what looks like an ordinary alchemists lab ...
  recently used."

6 (13,3) - 5 LIZARDMAN (#57) (Morale 60, 81 XP) approach you suspiciously, as
  they suspect you are servants of Yarash.  If you "P"arley with them, you can
  convince them not to attack.  Add the current character's Charisma modifier
  to 0 for "A"busive; 15 for "H"aughty or "S"ly; 30 for "N"ice; 50 for "M"eek;
  then:

  * Score is below 75: The lizardmen attack: 'Mutilating scum! We will die
    before we let you twist us as you have our other people!  But you will die
    first!'
  * Score is 75 or more: The lizardmen are peaceful: 'Since you are not the
    servants of Yarash, we will not kill you.  The enemy of my enemy is not my
    enemy!'

8 (9,13) - "You have entered a room filled with a horrible assortment of
  torture instruments.  In the center is a large table with metal restraints.
  The walls are lined with flasks and bottles containing powders, oils,
  ointments, and draughts.  These are surely of an alchemical nature."

10 (13,11) - "You have entered a room filled with large vats with the same oily
  black stuff that flows from the fountain.  The chamber stinks.  On the walls
  are shelves of bottles and flasks."

17 - If you search, "As you are poking around in the vats, a pain crazed lizard
  man surfaces and attacks you!  Two others quickly join him from other vats."
  Fight 3 MUTANT LIZ-MAN (#58) (Morale undefined, 66 XP); the party is always
  surprised, whereas the monsters are only surprised on a roll of 1.

18 - If you search, "You find a notebook.  A typical entry reads, 'Subject 213:
  progressing well, scars healing, unable to talk yet.  Subject 214: died when
  treated, failed again ...'"

19 - "You are in a storeroom holding a vast collection of magical junk."  If
  you search, "However, hidden amidst all this junk you find some treasure."
  You find 400 gold, 1200 silver, and 3 random magical items (276-1277 XP).

20 - Same as location 19; there is a separate hidden treasure here.

21 - Same as location 19; there is a separate hidden treasure here.

22 (1,1) - "You see a sign over the door in front of you.  It says, 'Don't
  forget the password'.  This is followed by six Dwarvish runes", 'NOKNOK' in
  Dethek.  You will then be immediately asked for a password; if you say
  anything other than 'NOKNOK', all characters attacked by a super-strong
  mutant lizardman for 201 damage each.

  (I suppose righteous fury against software pirates is what gives the
  lizardman that extra strength.)

23 (2,1) - Here you find a series of pipes and fountains that Yarash is using
  for his experiments, and that is also polluting the Stojanow River.  You can
  destroy the equipment; if you fail to destroy it the first time (probability
  of ~34.9%), it is best to get away from it as it will soon explode on its
  own.  The explosion does 3d10 damage to every party member.

  Destroying the machinery marks the area as cleared; but this doesn't actually
  matter, as you cannot leave Level 3 without defeating Yarash, which also
  does.

  (The way this works: You roll d10 repeatedly.  If you do so 10 times, you
  successfully destroy the machinery.  If any roll is 1, "You hear a whining
  from the pipes the black liquid is bubbling.  However, not all the equipment
  is yet destroyed."  This will destabilize the equipment and return you to the
  previous menu, where you will have at most two more d10 rolls to safely
  destroy the equipment.)

24 (5,4) - "You have entered a pumping room.  Working as slaves in this room
  are three lizard men with whip cuts across their back who are shackled to the
  wall by long chains.  Two of them are pouring barrels of the black
  contaminant into a large vat.  The other is working a bellows pump."

  If you attack them, they counterattack with the barrels of mutagens they are
  holding (2 random characters take 201 damage each); you then fight 3
  LIZARDMAN (#57) (Morale 100, 49 XP); parleying with a "H"aughty, "S"ly, or
  "A"busive attitude has the same effect.  If you parley with a "N"ice or
  "M"eek attitude, they allow you to free them.  They then describe what Yarash
  is doing and how you can get help from their tribe (Journal Entry 35).

25 (4,1) - You confront Yarash here.  All options lead to combat, against 1
  YARASH (#81) and 6 MUTANT LIZ-MAN (#58) (Morale 100, 959 XP).  Yarash carries
  Bracers AC 4, Wand of Paralyzation (23 charges), 2 Potions of Healing, and
  1 Potion of Speed.

  Yarash is fond of using the Wand of Paralyzation; you should disable or kill
  him as soon as possible.

26 (5,0) - A dial here controls the destination of the adjacent teleporter TK.
  You may set this to blue, copper, silver, or gold.

27 (6,1) - Yarash's desk is covered with papers.  Searching yields:
  * a letter from the Boss demanding that Yarash join him (Journal Entry 33);
  * Yarash's unsent reply (Journal Entry 49);
  * a message to the buccaneers offering a bounty for a real sahuagin (Journal
    Entry 27);
  * a warning to an agent about the dangers in the mountains to the northwest
    (Journal Entry 56);
  * a note to a trapper about kobolds and hobgoblins (Journal Entry 40).

SECTION 6.18.1 - Lizardman Keep Overview
----------------------------------------

Plot background:

This ruined keep was once defended by a powerful wizard, who placed an anti-
magic shell around the entire area to protect against magical attacks.  That
did not stop the conventional assault that caused the keep to fall.  Now, the
ruins are occupied by lizardmen, who have been disrupting trade to the east of
Phlan.  The Boss has been courting them, but the lizardmen as yet have not
taken sides.  The council tasks you with preventing the lizardmen from joining
the Boss.

Strategy:

Before coming here, complete Yarash's Pyramid, freeing and befriending the
lizardmen at Yarash's Pyramid Level 3 location 24.  You may then give the
friend-word SAVIOR to the old lizardman here to complete the mission.  You may
then enter the catacombs and loot pools P4, P5, and P6 for three Shields +2.

SECTION 6.18.2 - Lizardman Keep Details
---------------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 16
                  #~~~~~~~~#  #~~#  #~~#  ####
 0                #  '  '  #  #  #  #  #  #  #        0  GROUND LEVEL
      #############''''''''####''####''####''####        KEY:
 1    #                                         #     1
   ####     ##########                 ####     #        ~ moat (impassable)
 2 ~  '     #  '  '  #                    #     #     2  # wall
   ####     #''''''''#                    #     #        ' rubbled wall
 3    #     #  ' 1'  #            Eg      #     #     3  + door/archway
      #     ####++####                 ####     ####     \ stairs down
 4    #                                         '  ~  4
      #                                         ####     E Entrance/exit
 5    #                                         #     5
   ####  ##########  ####'''''''''              #
 6 ~  #  #     ' 3'  #Ec'10'10'Ed'              #     6
   ~''#  #     '''#  #''''''''####              ####
 7 ~  '  #   Ef' 3#  #  '  '  ####              '  #  7
   ####  #     #++#  #''''''''#\\#              '''#
 8    #  #   16#     '10'  '  'Ee'              '  #  8
      #  #'''  #     ''''  '''''''              ####
 9    #  ' 3'  #     '10'Eb'10'10'              #     9
      #  #'''  #     '''''''''''''              #
10    #  # 3'  #                                #    10
   ####  #''####                    ''''''####  #
11 #  '                             '     '  #  #    11
   ####                             '     #  #  #
12    #            Ea               '     +  #  #    12
      #                             '     #  #  #
13    #                             '     #  #  #    13
   ####                             ''''''####''#
14 ~  '                                      '  #    14
   ~'''''###################++#######''####''####
15 ~  '  '  #              #E1#     #  #  #  #       15
   ~~~~~~####              #++#     #~~#  #~~#
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 16
   #################################################
 0 ###############################~~################  0  CATACOMBS
   ###############################~~################     KEY:
 1 #######P1~~~###################~~~  ####Eg#######  1
   #######~~~~~###################~~~  ####  #######     # wall
 2 #######     #############           #     #######  2  ~ pool
   #######  ################  ####~~~~~#  ##########     \ stairs up
 3 #######  #############     ####P7~~~#  ##########  3
   #######  #############  #############  ##########     E Entrance/exit
 4 #######              #  #      Ed####  ##########  4  P Pool
   ###################  #  #  ##########  ##########
 5 #############Ec####  #  #  ~P6####     ##########  5
   #############  ####  #  ####~~####  #############
 6 #############  ####        #        #############  6
   #############  ####     ####  ####  #############
 7 ####Ef####              ####  ####     ##########  7
   ####  ####  ####  ~~~~  ####  #\\####  ##########
 8 ####  ####  ####  ~P8~        #Ee####  ##########  8
   ####  ####~~####  ~~~~  ####  #  ####  ##########
 9 ####  ~~~~P2#           ####  #        ##########  9
   ####  ####~~#  ####  #######  #  ################
10 ####  ####  #  ####  #Eb      #  ################ 10
   ####  ####  #  ####  ####  #  #  ################
11 ####        #     #  ####  #  #        ########## 11
   ##########  ####  #  ####  #  #  ####  ##########
12 ##########  ####  #        #  #  ####           # 12
   ##########  ####  #############  #######  ~~~~  #
13 ##########     #        ####     #  ~~~#  ~P5~  # 13
   #############  #  ~~~~  ####  ####  ~~~#  ~~~~  #
14 #############  #  ~P3~        ####  ~~~#        # 14
   #############  #  ~~~~  ####  ####  ~~~##########
15 #############Ea#        ####        ~P4########## 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Special penalties: There is an anti-magic zone in this entire area; it is not
  possible to cast spells here, even from magic items.  Also, in either swampy
  areas or the restricted tunnels of the catacombs, you may receive
  additional penalties in combat.

Random encounters: None.

Fleeing: If you are on the surface, you move to (8,12).  If you are in the
  catacombs, you are moved to a pool-specific location near the pool you were
  at.

Resting: It is always safe to rest anywhere.

Clearing the area: The area is considered cleared if you either defeat Drythh
  in a duel, or if you kill most of the lizardmen in the area.  In order to do
  the latter, you must defeat at least 40 lizardmen (there are a total of 50),
  though only battles in the catacombs and the main attack by 20 lizardmen at
  location 10 actually count.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: Both maps have the same outline,
  though the anti-magic aura only exists in the Gold Box version; the duel with
  Drythh also only exists in the Gold Box version.  The lizardmen in the
  tabletop version may present you with medallions that mark the bearers as a
  friend of all lizardmen.

E1 [location 15] (8,15) - Exit to Wilderness (37,8).

Ea/Eb/Ec/Ed/Ee/Ef/Eg - There are passages here that lead to the other layer;
  on the surface you may need to search for them.  The passages lead to the
  corresponding location on the other map.

  The first time you enter the catacombs, you are attacked by 10 GIANT LIZARD
  (#59) (Morale 100, 206 XP).  You receive penalties of -4 to hit and damage;
  humans, half-elves, and elves also receive -2 to movement.  (The number that
  attack is supposed to decrease if you kill some on the surface, but this
  doesn't actually happen.)

  Entering the catacombs also marks locations 1, 3, and 10 as visited; you
  should avoid the underground until you have visited them.

P - If you approach this pool while some of the 50 lizardmen in this area are
  still alive, 5 LIZARDMAN (#57) (Morale 100, 81 XP) will emerge from the pool
  and each throw a javelin at random party members (each attack is THAC0 16 and
  does 1d6 damage).

  The first time you approach a pool, the lizardmen automatically surprise you;
  it is thereafter rolled for.  If you are surprised and they are not, they
  re-enter the pool before you can react.  Otherwise, you will have the chance
  to attack them; such combats inflict a -4 penalty to your party's attack
  rolls and a -2 penalty to movement.

  You will then have the chance to enter the pool.  If you enter:
  * If you just encountered lizardmen here, and you did not defeat them, they
    will attack you without you being able to retaliate (5 THAC0 12 attacks on
    random characters, 2d2 damage per hit; then 5 THAC0 12 attacks on random
    characters, 1d8 damage per hit).
  * Otherwise, you find treasure if you have not yet searched this pool:
    P1, P2, P3, P7, P8: 216 XP, 1 gem, 1000 gold, 1000 silver
    P4, P5, P6        : 350 XP, 1 gem, 1000 gold, 1000 silver, Shield +2

1 (4,3) - Former storeroom.  The first time you enter this building:
  * If you did not rescue the three lizardmen at Yarash's Pyramid Level 3
    location 24, and have not yet entered the catacombs: You are attacked by 2
    LIZARDMAN (#57) and 1 GIANT LIZARD (#59) (Morale 100, 53 XP).

  * If you did rescue the three lizardmen, and this is the first time you have
    entered any of locations 1, 3, or 10: "An old lizardman appears before you,
    hand raised in a gesture of peace."

    "C"ombat results in the automatic death of the old lizardman; the lizardmen
    subsequently behave as if you had never saved their brethren, which results
    in the attack for this location.

    If you "P"arley, 'A group of humans were described to me by three of our
    people  whom they rescued.  If you are they you will have been shown our
    tribal friend-word.'  (This was mentioned in Journal Entry 35.)

    * If you do not give the correct response of 'SAVIOR': "'You are not they
      who rescued my children, but are murderous pirates!  Then you are not
      safe here!'  He disappears with amazing speed into the wilderness around
      you."  You are attacked by 2 LIZARDMAN (#57) and 1 GIANT LIZARD (#59)
      (Morale 100, 53 XP).
    * If you answer 'SAVIOR': "The old lizard man recognizes the word and his
      lips part in a toothy grin.  You all gather close as he begins his
      story."  (Journal Entry 31)  Drythh then immediately shows up and
      challenges the old lizardman; the old lizardman asks one of you to
      champion him:
      * If you say "N"o, "'Then I must fight him myself.'  The combat is
        extremely short in duration.  When it is finished Drythh turns to his
        followers, 'Kill them!'" Fight 1 DRYTHH (#95) and 12 LIZARDMAN (#57)
        (Morale 100, 218 XP).
      * If you say "Y"es, your chosen champion fights DRYTHH (#95) (Morale 100)
        one-on-one.  If you lose, the result is the same as if you had said
        "N"o.  If you win, "Seeing their leader fall, the other lizard men
        withdraw.  The old lizard man turns to you, 'You have done me great
        service.  Rest assured that my people will not join Tyranthraxus.
        Still my people still are hostile to strangers.  I think it is best if
        you leave.'  He turns and disappears into the wilderness."

        (What this means in practice: You completed the quest, but if you feel
        like it, you can loot the catacombs, fighting battles there as if you
        hadn't.)

  * If you did not rescue the three lizardmen and you have already entered the
    catacombs, or if you have already dueled Drythh, then nothing happens here.

3 - Former servants' quarters.  The first time you enter this L-shaped
  building:
  * If you did not rescue the three lizardmen at Yarash's Pyramid Level 3
    location 24, and have not yet entered the catacombs: You are attacked by 3
    GIANT LIZARD (#59) (Morale 100, 62 XP).
  * If you did rescue the three lizardmen, and have not yet had the encounter
    with the old lizardman, it happens as described in location 1, except the
    incorrect friend-word results in the attack for location 1 (this is a bug).
  * If you did not rescue the three lizardmen and you have already entered the
    catacombs, or if you have already dueled Drythh, then nothing happens.

10 - Former central keep.  The first time you enter this 4x4 area:
  * If you did not rescue the three lizardmen at Yarash's Pyramid Level 3
    location 24, and have not yet entered the catacombs: Lizardmen jump out of
    ambush and throw javelins at the party; each attack is THAC0 18 and does
    1d6 damage.  You are then immediately attacked by 20 LIZARDMAN (#57) and 4
    GIANT LIZARD (#59) (Morale 60, 409 XP).  Your party receives penalties of
    -3 to hit and -2 to movement.
  * If you did rescue the three lizardmen, and have not yet had the encounter
    with the old lizardman, it happens as described in location 1, except the
    incorrect friend-word results in the attack for location 1 (this is a bug).
  * If you did not rescue the three lizardmen and you have already entered the
    catacombs, or if you have already dueled Drythh, then nothing happens.

16 (3,8) - If you have not yet defeated Drythh in a duel, and you search this
  square, you will find 1 jewelry, 1 gem, and 1000 gold (575 XP).

SECTION 6.19.1 - Buccaneer Base Overview
----------------------------------------

Plot background:

This area is not findable until you are tasked by the council to rescue the
heir to Bivant.  The council refuses to pay the ransom for the kidnapped child.
To succeed, you must rescue the child in any way possible.  Once you either
complete or fail the mission, you may not re-enter the base.

Strategy:

Buy the pass at location 6, and use it to pass the guards at location 4.  You
may then attack the captain at location 5 to claim his magical treasure without
alerting the entire base.

You can then free the heir to Bivant by letting loose the animals at location
10, which will let you sneak into the slave pen at location 11 unmolested and
rescue the boy; you should then leave the base promptly.  You can fight many,
many combats here, but other than the captain, they provide minimal experience
and treasure.

SECTION 6.19.2 - Buccaneer Base Details
---------------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 1
   ######################+++++######################
 0 ################  # 7+ E  E+ 7#  ################  0  KEY:
   ################  ####     ####  ################
 1 #############                       #############  1  # wall
   #############  #######     #######  #############     + door/archway
 2 ####### 7#     #     #     #     #     # 7#######  2
   #######++#     #     #     #     #     #++#######     E Entrance/exit
 3 #######        +  8  +     +  8  +        #######  3
   #######        #     #     #     #        #######
 4 ####           #     #     #     #           ####  4
   ####           #######     #######           ####
 5 #                                               #  5
   #  #############           #######  ##########  #
 6 #  #     #     #    3 11   #     #10+        #  #  6
   #  #     #     #  ####++#  #     #  #        #  #
 7 #  +     #     + 3#12 12# 3+  8  +  #        #  #  7
   #  #     #     #  #     #  #     #  #        #  #
 8 #  #     #     # 3#12 12# 3#     #  #        #  #  8
   #  #############  #######  #######  ##########  #
 9 #                   3  3                        #  9
   ####     ####++####           ####++####     ####
10 # 7+     #        # 2  2  2  2#        #     + 7# 10
   ####     #    8   #           #    8   #     ####
11 ####    6#        # 2  4  2  2#        #     #### 11
   #######  ####++####  #++####  ####++####  #######
12 #######              # 5   #              ####### 12
   ##########           #++####           ##########
13 ##########           #     #           ########## 13
   #############++#     #     #     #++#############
14 ############# 7#     #     #     # 7############# 14
   ################     #######     ################
15 ################                 ################ 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Random encounters: None, if you have either captured the base, or not rescued
  the boy by subterfuge or force.  Otherwise, you may face guards on alert,
  probability (random combats fought + 1) in 12; in 13 if the animals are
  currently free:
  * Wave 1: 20 BUCCANEER (#99) (Morale undefined, 46 XP)
  * Wave 2: 4 3RD LVL FIGHTER (#100) and 30 BUCCANEER (#99) (Morale undefined,
    84 XP)
  * Wave 3: 4 3RD LVL FIGHTER (#100) and 40 BUCCANEER (#99) (Morale undefined,
    108 XP)
  * Wave 4: same as location 4 wave 5.

Resting: You may rest anywhere safely if you have captured the base.  If you
  have not, but have rescued the boy by subterfuge or force, the boy is noticed
  and your rest is immediately disturbed by the next random encounter.
  Otherwise, you may rest at will in the merchants' camp, but will be rousted
  out anywhere else.

Clearing the area: You may complete the mission via any of:
  (1) simply buy the heir to Bivant, which does not actually require any money
  (2) use violence to free the heir and all the other slaves.  This is easier
      if you distract the buccaneers by freeing the animals first.
  (3) use extra violence to capture the base outright.  This always entails
      defeating the buccaneer captain in combat.

  You may also fail the mission by either of:
  (1) surrendering to the buccaneers
  (2) rescuing and then subsequently abandoning the boy (by running from
      combat; you may get a warning about this first).

Differences from the tabletop adventure: Both this area and the quest to rescue
  the heir to Bivant do not exist at all in the tabletop version.

E [location 1] - Exit to Wilderness (12,31).  As you enter, you are led to the
  merchants' camp.

  If the guards are on alert, and the animals are not currently free, you fight
  8 BUCCANEER (#99) (Morale 100, 18 XP) as you approach the gate.

2 - Merchants' camp.

3 - If you haven't already rescued the heir or stirred up the base, "You are
  just outside a pen for holding slaves.  The people here are worn and beaten,
  destined to a life of slavery.  Around the pen there are many guards and
  sleazy merchants looking at the slaves.  You see a boy that has a heart-
  shaped birthmark on his left shoulder.  As you stare at the boy, a sleazy fat
  merchant approaches you and says ... 'That young boy will bring a good price
  at Zhentil Keep.  I think I shall buy him.'"  (Isn't that birthmark
  identifying the heir to Bivant convenient?)  You may:
  * Punch merchant: His guard of 6 BUCCANEER (#99) (Morale 60, 14 XP) attacks.
    This does not result in any further trouble, and the merchant leaves.
  * Agree or Say nothing: Nothing happens.
  * Rescue boy: You have three options:
    * Sneak into pen: You move to location 11.
    * Attack guards: You fight the guards from location 11.
    * Do not rescue boy now: Nothing happens.

4 (7,11) - If you have not captured the base, two large guards are standing
  here.  You may pass them in peace if you "S"how pass.  "B"ribing them will
  not work.  "A"ttacking them results in a fight with 2 4TH LVL FIGHTER (#41)
  (Morale 100, 327 XP).  This will draw the attention of the buccaneers, and
  result in further waves of attacks:
  * Wave 2: 1 3RD LVL FIGHTER (#100) and 20 BUCCANEER (Morale 80, 61 XP)
  * Wave 3: 1 5TH LVL FIGHTER (#101), 1 3RD LVL FIGHTER, and 50 BUCCANEER
    (Morale undefined, 179 XP)
  * Wave 4: 1 5TH LVL FIGHTER, 2 3RD LVL FIGHTER, and 53 BUCCANEER (Morale 100,
    201 XP).  (53 is, in what may or may not be sheer coincidence, the size of
    a standard NFL roster.  Additional trivia: D&D's birthplace is in hardcore
    Packer fan country; the Packers and Buccaneers were divisional rivals at
    the time.)
  If he is still alive, the buccaneer captain then approaches you, and gives
  you a chance to surrender.  If you do, you lose 75% of your money and 50% of
  your light items, and are forced to leave the base and fail the mission;
  otherwise you continue to fight:
  * Wave 5: 1 CAPTAIN (#102) (if still alive), 15 4TH LVL FIGHTER (#41), and
    40 BUCCANEER (Morale 100) (3561 XP if captain is still alive)
  Defeating this last wave causes all remaining buccaneers to surrender; you
  capture the base, and free all the slaves including the heir to Bivant, and
  if you killed the captain here you also may claim the captain's magical gear:
  Long Sword +4, Shield +2, Plate Mail +3.

  This series of combats is actually very easy, despite its scale.

5 (7,12) - If you enter this room by using a pass, the buccaneer captain comes
  out to greet you:
  * If you "M"ention the young boy, you have the option to "B"uy the boy for
    75% of the party's money and 10% of the party's light items.
  * If you "A"ttack the captain, fight 1 CAPTAIN (#102) and 4 4TH LVL FIGHTER
    (#41) (Morale 100, 1669 XP).  You may then claim the captain's magical gear
    as above, though this does not capture the base, nor does it alert the
    other buccaneers.  If you run away, this does alert the other buccaneers.

6 (2,11) - "There is a seedy little man here who whispers 'Pssst, buddy.  Want
  to buy a pass to see the captain?'"  The pass (an actual inventory item)
  costs 25% of the current character's money.

7 - If you have not captured the base, this guard tower is garrisoned by 4
  BUCCANEER (#99) (Morale 60, 9 XP).  If you captured the boy by subterfuge or
  force, they attack; otherwise you are asked to leave and may choose whether
  to attack or leave.  More guards appear if you defeat them and come back.

8 - Buccaneer barracks.  This is empty if you have captured the base.  If not,
  and the animals are running rampant, the guards normally quartered here are
  busy capturing the animals.

  You are otherwise confronted by the buccaneers: if you captured the boy by
  subterfuge or force, you are attacked immediately.  Otherwise, you are asked
  to leave.  If you stay, you fight 5 waves of battles that start with 20
  BUCCANEER (#99) (Morale 70, 46 XP); waves 2...5 are the same as in location
  4.

10 (11,6) - Gate to animal pen.  You may choose to release the animals penned
  here.  This will distract the guards for the next 60 minutes, but doesn't
  otherwise provoke them.

11 (7,6) - Entrance to the slave pen.  If the animals from the animal pen are
  running around, any guards will be distracted and not present.  Attempting to
  sneak by the guards will never work.  Attacking the guards results in a fight
  with 4 BUCCANEER (#99) (Morale 65, 9 XP).

12 - Slave pen.  If you have not captured the base, the heir to Bivant is here;
  you may Get him (even if you already have him), freeing the other slaves in
  the process.  Once you have the heir, fleeing from combat runs the risk of
  leaving the heir behind.

SECTION 6.20.1 - Zhentil Keep Outpost Overview
----------------------------------------------

Plot background:

Zhentil Keep is a major wealthy city at the western end of the Moonsea.  It is
famous for infighting by primarily evil factions.  The city is now wary of the
rebirth of one of its former rivals.  This outpost was built here partly to
keep an eye on New Phlan.

Porphyrys Cadorna proposes a treaty between the two cities so that New Phlan
can focus on rebuilding.  He does so by sending the party on a diplomatic
mission with a magically sealed diplomatic packet.  His end goal is to take
more power in New Phlan, which isn't a surprise, but his methods are: what he
actually proposes is an alliance between him and Zhentil Keep, with acceptance
to be signaled by the execution of the party -- which eliminates some powerful
rivals of Cadorna.  The Zhentarim will not know this until they read the entire
contents of the packet, so the party will be treated as guests under a
diplomatic flag of peace at first.

Strategy:

You can complete this with minimal combat, but the Zhentarim leaders carry good
treasure.  Have dinner with the commandant, then set a watch when you return to
your quarters.  You will be attacked, but all combatants other than the leaders
are very weak.  Then, wander around the outpost until you trigger the combat
with the leaders.

SECTION 6.20.2 - Zhentil Keep Outpost Details
---------------------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 28
   ######################+++++######################
 0 #     #        + 3   #E1 E1#     +        +     #  0  KEY:
   #     #VV####++#     #     #     #++####++#     #
 1 #     #       5#     #     #     #        #     #  1  # wall
   #++####        #######     #######        ####++#     V or > illusionary
 2 #  #                                         #  #  2         one-way wall
   #  #        ####++####     ####++####        #  #     + door/archway
 3 #  #        #    B   #     #    B   #      E2#  #  3
   #  #     #######++####     ####++#######     #  #     E Entrance/exit
 4 #  #     #  #          E3           # B+     #  #  4  B Barracks
   #  #     #  #  #######+++++#######  #  #     #  #
 5 #  +     + B+  #                 #  #  #     +  #  5
   #  #     #  #  #  ####     ####  #  ####     #  #
 6 #  #     #  #  #  #  +     +  #  #           #  #  6
   #  #     ####  #  ####     ####  ####        #  #
 7 #  #E2         #                 #  #        #  #  7
   #  #           #  #++#######++#  #  #        #  #
 8 #  #E2         #  # 6   #     #  #  +        #  #  8
   #  #           #  #     #     #  #  #        #  #
 9 #  #           #  #     #     #  #  #        #  #  9
   #  #     ####  #  #     #     #  ####        #  #
10 #  +     #  #  #  #     #     #  #           +  # 10
   #  #     #  #  #  #############  #  ####     #  #
11 #  #     + B+  #                 #  > B>     #  # 11
   #  #     #  #  ###################  #  #     #  #
12 #  #     #  #                       #  #     #  # 12
   #  #     #######++####     ####++#######     #  #
13 #  #        #    B   #     #    B   #        #  # 13
   #++####     ####++####     ####++####     ####++#
14 #     #            E2                     #     # 14
   #     ####++##########++#++##########++####     #
15 #     +                                   +     # 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Random encounters: None, except after dinner and before the garrison has
  surrendered.  After you are attacked after dinner, the chance of a random
  combat is [random combats + 1] in 15.  The second such "combat" increments
  the counter, but in place of combat you will get the message "There is great
  confusion as the guards run to their posts."

  Combat is with [(5 * random combats) + 5] GUARD (#96), and [random combats
  + 2] CORPORAL (#54) who do not negotiate.  After six "combats" (five actual
  fights), the next encounter will be the two waves from location 5.

Resting: If you have not yet either met the commandant for dinner or defeated
  him in combat, resting will eventually result in you being led to dinner,
  even if you have attacked the guards and are outside your quarters.  After
  dinner, you will be disturbed by the next garrison random encounter described
  above.

Clearing the area: The diplomatic mission is flagged as successful if you
  enter and are taken to your room, then leave by any means other than
  surrendering.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The map and theme are roughly the
  same.  The dinner conversation with the commandant is similar; you'd think it
  would be different with a human DM.  The high-level staff are fewer in number
  and less well armed in the Gold Box version.

E1 [location 1] - Exit to Wilderness (3,32).

  When you first enter, you are introduced to the Commandant, then receive a
  brief tour of the outpost that ends at location 3.  You will not be permitted
  to wander freely, partly because the commandant does not want you to see that
  the outpost is lightly garrisoned and only appears strong.

  After dinner and before the garrison has surrendered, nearing the exit has a
  75% chance of an attack by 11 GUARD (#96) (Morale undefined, 25 XP).

E2 [location 4] - You may climb over the wall here.  This also exits to
  Wilderness (3,32).

E3 - Gate to central keep.  This is impassable unless the party is being led.

B - Barracks.  You may get attacked by guards in other versions of the game,
  though nothing happens in the IBM version.

3 (5,0) - "The guard says 'Here are your quarters.  Do not leave this area.'
  He then leaves."  You may:
  * Walk around:
    Leaving your quarters results in a prompt encounter with guards who demand
    you return.  They will not accept a "B"ribe.  If you attack, you fight 4
    GUARD (#96) (Morale 75, 9 XP).  You are given a chance to surrender after
    that:
    * If you "S"urrender: You lose all your money and items and are placed
      outside the outpost; this does not complete the mission.
    * If you "A"ttack them: You fight two waves of 4 CORPORAL (#54) and 16
      GUARD (Morale undefined, 68 XP).  You may then either return to your
      quarters as if nothing had happened, or leave the outpost (which will
      actually complete the mission, even if you do not defeat the commandant).
  * Relax or rest:
    When it is time for dinner (14:00), you are led to location 6.

  Once you return from dinner, you have the option of going to sleep with or
  without a watch.  If you do not set a watch, one THAC0 7 attack on a random
  character is made that does 8d4+8 damage if it hits.  A two-wave combat then
  ensues (both combats are Morale 70 with a watch, 80 otherwise):
  * Wave 1: 4 AIDES (#53)
  * Wave 2: 5 CORPORAL (#54) and 6 AIDES (#53)

5 (4,1) - If you have not had dinner with the commandant, entering this square
  leads to an attack in two waves:
  * Wave 1: 1 DWARVEN FIGHTER (#48), 10 AIDES (#53), 12 CORPORAL (#54), and 25
    GUARD (#96) (Morale undefined, 710 XP).  The dwarven fighter carries
    Gauntlets of Ogre Power, Long Sword +1, and Chain Mail +1.
  * Wave 2: 1 COMMANDANT (#50), 1 AL-HYAM DAZID (#86), 20 AIDES (#53), and 24
    CORPORAL (#54) (Morale undefined, 2879 XP).  The commandant carries: Long
    Sword +1, Plate Mail +2, Shield +1, Ring of Fire Resistance, 3 Potion of
    Extra Healing, Javelin of Lightning (which will be used given a chance);
    his magic-user carries Bracers AC 3, Ring of Fire Resistance, and Wand of
    Lightning (20 charges).  (This is strange, because Al-Hyam Dazid isn't
    supposed to show up until Valjevo Castle.)
  "After killing the commandant the rest of the outpost either surrenders or
  runs away."

6 (6,8) - "You arrive at the officers mess and are seated with the commandant
  and his advisors.  A fine meal of roast boar is served with a hearty red
  wine.  The commandant turns to one of the characters and says, 'So, how's
  everything in Phlan?'"  There are two ways you can get information out of the
  commandant:
  * Discuss "M"agic, then "M"ention Pool of Radiance, which results in the
    commandant telling you a story (Journal Entry 46).
  * Discuss the "C"ity of "O"ld Phlan: "As you talk about old Phlan's
    inhabitants the commandant says 'I know a legend about a fire being called
    Tirantikus.  I believe that Tirantikus and Tyranthraxus are one and the
    same.'"
  Otherwise, all you can accomplish is to give the commandant information.

  Once dinner is complete, you are guided back to location 3.

SECTION 6.21.1 - Valhingen Graveyard Overview
---------------------------------------------

Plot background:

The graveyard has been overflowing with undead ever since the Flight of the
Wyrms.  The undead trouble the Boss, since he does not trust his clerics to
handle them (he fears they will control the undead and gain power against him),
and his regular mundane troops fare very poorly against higher-level undead.
The undead have started to cross the river into the main areas of Phlan (in the
tabletop version, something you may be forced to directly deal with), so the
council of New Phlan is also troubled, and tasks you with ending this threat --
it has already sent adventuring parties into the graveyard to no avail.

Strategy:

Battling the undead here is not easy once you get past the skeletons and
zombies.  This mission should be delayed for as long as possible, even though
that increases the scale of combats.

You should have as many of the following as you can before coming here:
  * As many characters as possible should either know Fireball, or be level 6
    clerics.
  * Everyone should have a magical weapon, as higher-level undead are not
    damaged by mundane or sometimes even silver weaponry.  (The special two-
    handed swords are actually an inferior choice; you want shields to avoid as
    many undead melee attacks as possible.)
  * You will receive four scrolls each with two casts of Restoration when you
    accept the mission to clear the graveyard.  You will get four more if you
    complete the mission to rescue the heir of Bivant, and even more as you
    systematically explore the graveyard.
  * Your front three fighters should have ideally recently gained a level (in
    any class); even if you cast Restoration after a level drain, that will
    still wipe out any progress you had made towards the next level.

It also helps to cast buffs like Protection from Evil, Prayer, Enlarge, and
(if you have the bug fix applied) Mirror Image before triggering a fixed combat
with more powerful undead.

You can take short trips into the graveyard and rest outside of it.  Random
encounters can be very large, but there aren't very many of them, and they will
probably stay gone if you stick to this quest.  (To avoid a script-breaking
bug, do not leave the Graveyard after starting to fight wights until you
defeat the spectre at location 22.)

First, clear the Skeleton Zone: defeat all randomly encountered skeletons, the
large skeleton guarding treasure at location 5, and the spectre generating
skeletons at location 15.

Second, clear the Zombie Zone: defeat all randomly encountered zombies, the
juju zombie guarding treasure at location 8, and the spectre generating zombies
at location 18.

Third, clear the Wight Zone: prepare longer-lasting buffs before entering.  If
you equip Rings of Fire Resistance and cast Resist Fire, you can include party
members in the radius of a Fireball just to get rid of wights quickly.  Wights
accompanied by a mummy are especially dangerous, and even accompanying zombies
are a problem, as clerics turn those first.  Defeat the army of wights at
location 20, the spectre generating wights at location 22, and the wraith
guarding treasure at location 12.

The last zone has no random encounters.  Defeat the spectres at location 23,
then get the treasure at location 24.  Visit the coffin at location 25 and
sanctify it.  Then backtrack to location 26 to talk to the magic-user, but do
not let him join the party.  Pass through the secret door at location 29, cast
another set of buffs, and tackle the vampire at location 28.  Return to the
coffin at location 25 to finish off the vampire for good.

SECTION 6.21.2 - Valhingen Graveyard Details
--------------------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 10
   #################################################
 0 # S  S  S  S  S  S#  #                 '  #28   #  0  KEY:
   #                 #  #                 #  ####XX#
 1 # S  S  S  S  S  S#  #      23         #      29#  1  # wall
   #                 #++#######++#        ####''####     ' rubbled wall
 2 # S  S  S  S  S  S     S#24#  #                 #  2  + door/archway
   #                       #++#++#     #++#     ####     \ stair (behaves as
 3 # S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S#  #  #     #  #     #  #  3    a door)
   #                       #  #  #  ####  #######++#     X conditional passage
 4 + E                 3  S#  \  #  #   25   # W   #  4
   #                       #######  ####  ####     #     E Entrance/exit
 5 # S  S  S  S  S  S  S  S# W 20  W  W#  # W  W  W#  5  S Skeleton Zone
   #              ##########''#++####  #  #        #     Z Zombie Zone
 6 # S  S  S  S   + 4   + 5# W#21#  # W#  # W  W 10#  6  W Wight Zone
   #              #######  #  #\\#  #######  ####++#
 7 # S  S  S  S  S  S   #  # W#22   # W  W  W#     #  7
   #                    #  #  #######        #  ####
 8 # S  S  S  S  S  S   #  # W#       W  W   #  +12#  8
   #              ##########  #              #######
 9 # S  S  S  S  S#16  Z  Z 26# Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z#  9
   #        #######++#        ####                 #
10 # S  S  S#  \18#  # Z  Z  Z#  # Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z# 10
   #        #  #  #  #        #  ####              #
11 # S  S  S#  #  #  # Z  Z  Z#19   +    Z  Z  Z  Z# 11
   #        #++####++#        #  ####              #
12 # S 13  S#     \  # Z  Z  Z#  # Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z# 12
   ####++#  ##########        ####                 #
13 #   14# Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z# 13
   #     #                 #######                 #
14 #     # Z  Z  Z     Z  Z#     # Z  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z# 14
   #\\####     ####++#     #     #                 #
15 #15   # Z  Z#     # Z  Z#    8\ 7  Z  Z  Z  Z  Z# 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Undead scaling: The maximum number of many undead here scale to Party Strength.
  This is mostly calculated when you enter the graveyard, so you can game the
  calculation by removing all equipment before entering, and putting it back on
  just inside.

  Anything not listed contributes nothing to kill scores, which have a floor
  of zero.

  * Skeletons: For Skeleton Zone random encounters, location 3, and location 5,
    Skeleton Count is equal to Party Strength divided by 2, minus any Skeleton
    Kill Score from your last visit.  Skeleton Kill Score is tracked and capped
    at 254:
    * 1 for each randomly encountered skeleton in the Skeleton Zone
    * 5 for the spectre at location 15 (can reappear)
    * 5 for the vampire at location 28 (once only)

  * Zombies: For Zombie Zone random encounters and location 8, Zombie Count is
    equal to Party Strength divided by 4, minus any Zombie Kill Score from your
    last visit.  Zombie Kill Score is tracked and capped at 254:
    * 1 for each randomly encountered zombie in the Zombie Zone
    * 5 for the spectre at location 18 (can reappear)
    * 5 for the vampire at location 28 (once only)

  * Wights: For Wight Zone random encounters and location 20, Wight Count is
    equal to Party Strength divided by 8, minus any Wight Kill Score from your
    last visit.  Wight Kill Score is tracked and capped at 254:
    * 1 for each randomly encountered wight in the Wight Zone
    * 1 for each wight at location 20 (once only)
    * 5 for the spectre at location 22 (can reappear)
    * 5 for the vampire at location 28 (once only)

  * Spectres: Spectres do not appear randomly.  Spectre Kill Score is tracked:
    * 1 for each spectre at locations 15, 18, 22, or 23 (all can reappear)
    * 5 for the vampire at location 28 (once only)

Regenerating encounters: Many fixed encounters may happen again if you leave
  and return.  Fixed encounters that may only happen once ever are marked with
  an asterisk.

Random encounters: If the area has not been cleared, you will encounter the
  appropriate monsters in the zones labeled on the map.

  * Skeleton Zone [location 2]: Random encounter chance is 20%, against
    [Skeleton Count] SKELETON (#34).

  * Zombie Zone [location 6]: Random encounter chance is 20%, or 40% in Search
    mode, against [Zombie Count] ZOMBIE (#35).

  * Wight Zone [location 9]: Random encounter chance is 20%, or 40% in Search
    mode, against:
    * [Wight Count] WIGHT (#20), maximum of 4 per combat
    * [4 * Number of Wights] ZOMBIE (#35)
    * Random third monster:
      * 40% chance of 2 JUJU ZOMBIE (#29)
      * 40% chance of 2 GHOUL (#72)
      * 20% chance of 1 MUMMY (#114)

  They will attack immediately if they surprise you; otherwise:
  * "F"lee: The monsters flee first if "You have managed to sneak up on" the
    undead.  Otherwise, the success rate is determined by comparing your
    slowest party member to 6 for zombies, or 12 for other undead.
  * "P"arley: This will cause you to lose surprise if you surprised the undead,
    and start combat if you did not.

Fleeing: Your party is moved to one of: (1,6); (1,9); (7,4); (14,6); (14,9).

Resting: It is safe to rest if the graveyard has been cleared.  Otherwise,
  every 5 minutes there is a 4% chance you are disturbed by [Party Strength
  divided by 1d3] GHOUL (#72).

Clearing the area: The area is considered cleared once you have defeated the
  vampire for good at location 25.  Doing this requires first defeating the
  vampire at location 28, which in turn requires defeating the spectres at
  locations 22 and 23.  Defeating the spectres at locations 15 and 18 is not
  required.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The overall theme is similar, but the
  maps are very different; the Gold Box version replaces a lot of the treasure
  with a bunch of extra scrolls of Restoration spells; undead growth scales to
  Party Strength in the Gold Box version but is exponential (!) with the
  passage of time in the tabletop version.

All monsters here have Morale 101.

E [location 1] (0,4) - Exit to Wilderness (26,26).

3 (6,4) - "Claws rise from the soil and attempt to drag you down."  You are
  attacked as if forced into a random combat in the Skeleton Zone.

4* (5,6) - This mausoleum is guarded by 15 SKELETON (#34) (47 XP).

5* (7,6) - The inner mausoleum is guarded by 1 GIANT SKELETON (#22) and
  [Skeleton Count, but only if at least 17] SKELETON (#34)

  Once defeated, if you search, you find a marble chest containing 12 jewelry,
  10 gems, 69 gold, 28 silver, and 4 Clerical Scrolls (Restoration,
  Restoration) (5095 XP).

7* (10,15) - 25 ZOMBIE (#35) (166 XP) guard the outside of this mausoleum.

8* (9,15) - "A zombie with gray, leathery-hard skin gazes at you with hate-
  filled eyes."  Fight 1 JUJU ZOMBIE (#29), accompanied by 15 ZOMBIE (#35) if
  Zombie Count is at least 16.

  After combat, you find a treasure containing 110 gold, 290 silver, Wand of
  Lightning Bolt (3 charges), Potion of Healing, and 2 Clerical Scrolls
  (Restoration, Restoration) (1020 XP)

10* (15,6) - "You stand before a huge tower.  The single entrance is locked and
  strongly built.  Warning voices cry from within.  'We are the spirits of
  those who fought the dragons.  Leave us or die.'"

  If you do not, you are forced into a combat as a Wight Zone random combat
  with 4 wights, without any checks for Wight Kill Score.

12* (15,8) - "In the chamber is a single crypt.  Floating above the crypt is a
  wraith.  'I am the protector of the paladin.  I guard his remains for all
  eternity.  Leave or suffer.'"

  If you stay, fight 1 WRAITH (#21) (119 XP).  You may then loot the paladin's
  remains for treasure: Hammer +3, Sling of Seeking +2, Potion of Extra
  Healing, Clerical Scroll (Restoration, Restoration), and Magic-User Scroll
  (Slow, Hold Person, Invisibility 10' Radius) (600 XP).

  (This treasure and the treasure from location 24 probably were meant to be
  swapped.  Location 24 actually has items a paladin would be expected to
  have; the knight there grants treasure useful for each of the four major
  classes in the tabletop version, which is what you get here.)

13* (1,12) - 30 SKELETON (#34) (95 XP) guard the outside of this tower.

14 (1,13) - "Noxious fumes tear at your throat as you crunch through piles of
  dried bones."  Every party member must either successfully save vs. poison,
  or take 10 damage.

15 (0,15) - 1 SPECTRE (#17) is responsible for raising skeletons; defeating it
  yields 2234 XP and its treasure of 3 jewelry, 555 platinum, and 2000 gold.

  The spectre and its treasure reappear every time you enter the graveyard if
  Skeleton Count is not zero.

16* (5,9) - 15 ZOMBIE (#35) (100 XP) guard the outside of this tower.

18 (4,10) - 1 SPECTRE (#17) is responsible for raising zombies; defeating it
  yields 1516 XP and its treasure of 13 gems, 542 platinum, and 1111 gold.

  The spectre and its treasure reappear every time you enter the graveyard if
  Zombie Count is not zero.

19 (9,11) - This mausoleum is guarded by up to [Party Strength divided by 16,
  minimum 1] MUMMY (#114).

  There is no treasure here, and this is a difficult combat, so this combat
  should be avoided, but if you insist ... It helps to cast Protection from
  Evil, Prayer, and Shield spells before this combat to prevent too many
  characters getting paralyzed by the mummy fear aura.  You should also have
  Cure Disease prepared to get rid of disease immediately after combat.
  Fireball does reliable damage, and Lightning Bolt sometimes does incredible
  damage (which is strange).

20* (9,5) - "The air around the tower is charged with static electricity and
  ball lightning."  Fight [Wight Count] WIGHT (#20).  A late-game party may
  find 15+ wights here; be prepared.

  If the wights have already been defeated, "Written on the door (in the common
  tongue) is: 'Do not open this door.  A great evil has been laid to rest
  here.'"  If you search, "There are large silver holy symbols up and down the
  crack in the doorway."

21 (9,6) - "The lower chamber is filled with glass and fur objects of all
  types."  Every party member must successfully save vs. rod/staff/wand or take
  4 damage.

22 (9,7) - 1 SPECTRE (#17) is responsible for raising wights; defeating it
  yields 2234 XP and its treasure of 3 jewelry, 555 platinum, and 2000 gold.

  The spectre and its treasure reappear every time you enter the graveyard if
  Wight Count is not zero.

  This encounter is supposed to always trigger if it has never occurred before,
  but the script has a bug where it may fail if you leave the Graveyard after
  starting fighting wights, but before this encounter.

23 (9,1) - 2 SPECTRE (#17) (676 XP) guard the outside of this crypt.

24* (8,2) - "A voice speaks, 'Come, my brave adventurers.  You must take my
  gifts to better fight the evil that has come to the city.'  From the
  magically-lit tomb of a brave knight, a body rises from its resting place to
  lay weapons before the party."  You find Plate Mail +2, Long Sword +2
  (alignment lawful good; anyone not lawful good who tries to equip this sword
  takes 15 damage), Ring of Fire Resistance, Shield +1, 4 Clerical Scroll
  (Restoration, Restoration) (800 XP).

25* (12,4) - If you come here before you defeat the vampire at location 28:
  You find a coffin surrounded with broken crosses (despite the cross being
  Christian and not a symbol of any god of the Forgotten Realms) and spilled
  vials of holy water, and a scroll.  If you read the scroll, it is Journal
  Entry 43.  You may then either sanctify or overturn the coffin.  The latter
  does nothing.

  If you come here after you defeat the vampire at location 28, the vampire has
  returned to its coffin, and you must fight it:
  * If you either sanctified the coffin, or you have not left the graveyard
    after defeating the vampire once: fight 1 VAMPIRE (#105) (663 XP).  It is
    alone this time, and only has 1/3 of its starting hit points.
  * If you failed to sanctify the coffin *and* left the graveyard after
    defeating the vampire once, the vampire was able to recover its strength:
    fight 1 VAMPIRE (#23) and 15 WOLF (#106) (941 XP).
  If someone is carrying the Efreeti Bottle found in the Kobold Caves, but the
  efreet has not yet emerged from it, it now comes out to fight on your side: 1
  EFREETI (#70).

  Defeating the vampire a second time defeats it for good.  This will clear the
  area, and will also empty out the entire graveyard of anything remaining,
  whether undead or treasure.

26* (8,9) - If you have ever defeated the spectres at locations 22 and 23, but
  have not yet defeated the vampire, you are approached by a LEVEL 6 MU (#24):
  'Hail, noble adventurers.  I would ask you to help me end this foul undead
  curse.'
  * "L"et him join: 'The undead are controlled by a vampire who lurks in the
    northeast corner of the graveyard.'  However, he will immediately betray
    the party in the very next combat, as he is actually an agent of
    Tyranthraxus.  You can then make him friendly by casting Charm Person on
    him, although you will run into the problem that he does not truly know any
    spells.
  * "S"end him away: He immediately attacks you (181 XP).
  He carries a Ring of Protection +2.

28* (14,0) - The vampire who is behind all the undead in the graveyard is
  hidden here, and attacks immediately: 1 VAMPIRE (#23), 3 WOLF (#106) (763
  XP).  If the magic-user from location 26 is with you, he will join the
  vampire against you.

  If someone is carrying the Efreeti Bottle found in the Kobold Caves, the
  efreet emerges to fight on your side: 1 EFREETI (#70).  This does not consume
  the bottle, though the efreeti can only appear once.  The efreet isn't
  particularly helpful, because the battlefield is too congested for it to
  contribute much.

  The vampire cannot gaze at any character who has either a mirror or a Wooden
  Holy Symbol of Tyr equipped; if you don't have these for everyone, cast buffs
  to improve saving throws and have Charm Person or Dispel Magic prepared to
  counter the charm.

  Buffs like Mirror Image, Protection from Evil, and Prayer also help to
  protect yourself.

  Should you defeat the vampire, it will assume gaseous form and flee to
  location 25.  If you search afterwards, you will find its treasure: 12 gems,
  9000 gold, Wand of Magic Missiles (33 charges), 3 Potion of Healing, Shield
  +1, and 5 Clerical Scrolls (Restoration, Restoration) (3133 XP).

29 (15,1) - If the magic-user from location 26 is with you, "The mystic man
  speaks, 'The vampire is behind the northern wall.'"  You may walk through
  the northern wall here if you have ever defeated the spectres at locations 22
  and 23.

SECTION 6.22.1 - Stojanow Gate Overview
---------------------------------------

Plot background:

The Stojanow Gate guards the only approach to Valjevo Castle by land.  (Isn't
it a shame you cannot cast Fly or Water Walk in these games?)  When the time is
ripe, the council tasks you with infiltrating the gate and capturing it; the
city's military can then garrison the gate itself.

Strategy:

Buy the wagon at location 9 and use it to pass by the bugbears peacefully; you
can retry if that fails.  Ambush the tower guards at location 1 and 2 one at
a time, then return to location 8 to deal with the now-hostile bugbears.

SECTION 6.22.2 - Stojanow Gate Details
--------------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 9
   #############++###################++#############
 0 #     #     #E2#  #  #     #      E2            #  0  KEY:
   #     #     #  #  #  #++####  #++#############  #
 1 #     #     #  #  +           #     #     #  #  #  1  # wall
   #     #++####  ####  #######  #######     #  #  #     + door/archway
 2 #     +     +  #  +  #     #  #     #     #  +  #  2  \ stairway
   #######     #  #  #  #     #  #++####++#######  #
 3 #     +     #  #  #  #     #                    #  3  E Entrance/exit
   #############  ####  ####++#              #######
 4 #                                         +     #  4
   #                                         #     #
 5 #                        5a               #     #  5
   #        ####\\#######     #######\\####  #######
 6 #        ####\\#######13 13#######\\####        #  6
   #############\\#######+++++#######\\#############
 7 ##########    1      # 8  8#       2   ##########  7
   ##########           #     #           ##########
 8 ##########           #12 12#           ##########  8
   ##########           #+++++#           ##########
 9 #  # 3  3#           # 7  7#           # 3  3  3#  9
   #  #     #############     #############        #
10 #  +    3  3  3  3  5  5  5  5  3  3  3  3      # 10
   #######                                   ####++#
11 #     #             5  5  5  5            +     # 11
   #     #  ####  ####           #######  ####     #
12 #     + 4#  + 4#  #           #     # 4+  #     # 12
   #######  ####  #  ####  ####++#     #  #  #######
13 #     +        +     + 4#     #     +  #  #     # 13
   #     ####++#  #######  #############  ####     #
14 #     #     # 9+     +  +        + 9      +     # 14
   #++##########  #     #  #        #  #++#  ####++#
15 #            E1#     #  #        #E1#  #        # 15
   #############++###################++#############
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Random encounters: None, unless you set off the alarm in Valjevo Castle; you
  can then encounter patrols north of the gate, which works the same way it
  does in Valjevo Castle.  (You can also set off the alarm here, but it does
  does not properly trigger either random combats or alert the guard towers,
  as it is supposed to.)

Fleeing: Your party moves to ([Current X-coordinate], 14).

Resting: It is safe to rest anywhere (even if you are in the middle of crashing
  the gate and the tower guards are sending arrows and rocks your way), unless
  you set off the alarm in Valjevo Castle; in that case, rest north of the gate
  may be interrupted by a random encounter (the chance is 17% every 5 minutes).

Clearing the block: To clear this block, you must defeat both the bugbear
  patrol in front of the gate, and the guards from both of the two towers.

  The bugbear patrol consists of 15 BUGBEAR (#63) (Morale 60, 533 XP).  It can
  have four attitudes to the party: not suspicious, less suspicious, more
  suspicious, and hostile.  The hostile state can only be addressed by fighting
  them.

  Once you clear the block, "You have taken the gate!  You open the great
  portals as 20 human and demi-human guards immediately take possession of the
  guard towers."

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The tabletop version has hobgoblins
  patrolling instead of bugbears, but actually has a defense against flying
  PCs.  It otherwise works similarly.  (The river is so polluted that boats
  cannot cross; that pretty much has to be magical, because if that were to
  occur in real life you wouldn't even be able to get close to the river, which
  you are allowed to do here without harm.  Stopping Yarash from polluting the
  river also doesn't fix the pollution here.)

E1 - Exit to Podal Plaza.

E2 - Exit to Valjevo Castle Southwest Quadrant.

1 (4,7) - Western guard tower.  "There are two humans and three ettin in the
  room.  You overhear the mage tell his companion, 'How much longer must we
  wait before assaulting Phlan.  I am eager to become a baron.'"

  You may "F"lee back down the stairs or "A"dvance closer to them; "C"ombat or
  "P"arley set off the alarm, with your party surprise attacking 1 5TH LVL MU
  (#89), 1 AIDES (#53), and 3 ETTIN (#71) (Morale 50, 1371 XP).

2 (11,7) - Eastern guard tower.  "There are two humans and three ettin in the
  room.  You overhear the fighter tell the mage, 'You better watch your talk.
  The last guy who gave the Boss lip was thrown through the trapdoor to the
  medusa!'"

  You may "F"lee back down the stairs or "A"dvance closer to them; "C"ombat or
  "P"arley set off the alarm, with your party surprise attacking 1 LEVEL 6 MU
  (#24), 1 AIDES (#53), and 3 ETTIN (#71) (Morale 50, 1521 XP).  The level 6
  magic-user carries a Ring of Protection +2.

3 - Near stronghold wall, away from gate.
  * If the bugbears are alive, and not suspicious:
    "A voice from the tower yells 'Stay away from the wall!'"  The bugbears
    become more suspicious.
  * If the bugbears are alive, and less suspicious:
    "A voice yells down, 'We said stay away from the wall.  That includes the
    tower!'"  The bugbears become hostile.
  * If the bugbears are alive, and more suspicious:
    "The group of bugbears come over, 'We warned you!  What's the matter?
    Can't you understand Common?  I guess I'll have to teach you.'  The leader
    swings at you."  You may either "A"ttack them or "T"ake the punch (1d3
    damage to one character if it hits).  Either way, the bugbears then become
    hostile.
  * If the bugbears are alive, and hostile:
    "A group of bugbears approach.  'Throw down your weapons!'"  You may
    "F"lee; "S"urrender, same as "F"lee but you lose all money and 20% of light
    items; or "A"ttack.
  * If the bugbears are dead, but the tower guards are still alive:
    Arrows are launched at you from the guard towers (2 THAC0 16 attacks on
    random characters, 1d6 damage per hit).

4 - "Before you is Stojanow Gate.  This ancient edifice is built across the
  bend of the river, thus isolating the old town and the castle from the rest
  of the city.  The main wall rises 30 feet while the two watchtower rise to 50
  feet.  Lounging around the entrance are a group of bugbears."

  If the bugbears are more suspicious, visiting this location makes them less
  suspicious.  (You will not get any message about this.)

5 - Near stronghold gate.  This behaves as location 3, unless the bugbears are
  alive and you have the wagon from location 9.  In that case, the bugbears may
  act as if you are supposed to take supplies through the gate.  This is a roll
  that has a success rate of:
  * 0% if the bugbears are hostile, or if you are coming from the north
  * 70% if the bugbears are more suspicious
  * 80% if the bugbears are less suspicious
  * 90% if the bugbears are not suspicious

  If the roll succeeds, "A bugbear walks up to you.  'Okay, lets have the 15
  gold.'"
  * If you pay, you are taken to location 5a (8,5), north of the gate.
  * If you do not pay, roll a second time; failure is as if you had failed the
    first roll.  Otherwise, 'All right, get out of here then.  Come back when
    you've learned the rules.'  This makes the bugbears hostile (it should
    probably only make them suspicious).

  If the roll fails, 'Hey, wait a minute.  They are impostors!  All right,
  throw down your weapons!'  This behaves as if you had approached if the
  bugbears are actually hostile, but does not actually change the bugbear
  attitude (they should become hostile); you may "F"lee and try again.

7 - This gate is hard to "B"ash down and not possible to "P"ick, but the Knock
  spell always works.  You can move east and west to renew the options to
  "B"ash open the gate if you don't succeed at first.

  If the gate hasn't yet been opened, you are not being led through, and the
  tower guards are still alive, the tower guards throw rocks at the party
  (16 THAC0 17 attacks on random characters, 1d6 damage per hit).

8 - Same as location 7, if you are not coming from the north.

  If you come here from the north after killing both sets of tower guards, but
  the bugbear patrol is still alive, the bugbears confront you here.
  Attempting to "F"lee crashes the game; any other option starts combat with
  the bugbear patrol.  Winning this combat clears the block.

9 - If it is currently day, "A man driving a wagon full of food and equipment
  starts to drive past you, going north."

  You can ask him to sell his wagon for 250 gold; you can't haggle lower than
  this:
  * If you pay, 'Oh, by the way.  Better beware of the guards.  Ever since the
    giants moved into the castle area, bugbears have been stuck guarding the
    gate.  And they hate it.  Not only that they're afraid of them ettin.
    Makes 'em real jumpy.  Wouldn't give 'em no back talk if I were you.'
  * You can also simply kill the man for the wagon if you feel both poor and
    unethical, without any negative repercussions.

  This encounter doesn't happen more than once per visit, and stops occurring
  altogether once you acquire the wagon.

12 - Same as location 7, except the gate is easy to open from this direction.

13 - If you have killed the bugbear patrol, and some tower guards are still
  alive, the tower guards confront you.  You can "F"lee to the southern side of
  the map; any other option starts combat with 2 LEVEL 6 MU (#24), 2 AIDES
  (#53), and 6 ETTIN (#71) (Morale 80, 3042 XP); this happens even if you've
  killed one set of tower guards (but not both), and even though the magic-
  users in the towers aren't actually the same.  Each of the level 6 magic-
  users carries a Ring of Protection +2.  Winning this combat clears the block.

SECTION 6.23.1 - Valjevo Castle Overview
----------------------------------------

Plot background:

The ancient stronghold of Valjevo Castle has now been occupied by the Boss,
Tyranthraxus.  He has set up numerous defenses around the castle's inner tower,
with a heavy garrison surrounding a hedge maze.  The garrison's weakness is
that it is primarily composed of humanoids who aren't exactly models of
competence.

Strategy:

Get a disguise first, by visiting the washerwomen at location 1 and being
"N"ice.  The Banite clerics at location 10 carry a nice treasure; just attack
them outright, but don't take anything from the altar at the back of the
temple.  You can also get a good sword from diving in the pool at location 14.

There are many hill giants and fire giants, which are worth significant
experience if you still seek that, but you are not required to fight any.

You may pass into the castle hedge maze by giving the password RHODIA.

SECTION 6.23.2 - Valjevo Castle Details
---------------------------------------

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 3
   #################################################     NORTHWEST QUADRANT
 0 #           #  #     #           #  #           #  0
   #           #  #     #           #  #           #     KEY:
 1 #           #  #8b   #   20      #  +           #  1
   ##########++#  #++#######++#######  #############     # wall
 2 #18   #         8a                              #  2  + door/archway
   #     #                                         #
 3 #   17+         8a                            E3+  3  E Entrance/exit
   #######     #####################################
 4 #           #                                      4
   #++#++#     #
 5 #19#19#     #                                      5
   #######     #
 6 #     #     #                                      6
   #     #     #
 7 #   16+     +                                      7
   #     #   E6+
 8 #     #     +                                      8
   #######     #
 9 #     #     #    Hedge maze: See next section      9
   #     #     #    for map and details.
10 #     +     #                                     10
   #######     #
11 #           #                                     11
   #######     #
12 #     #     #                                     12
   #     #++#  #
13 #      5a#  #                                     13
   #        #  #
14 #      6a#  #                                     14
   #        #  #
15 #        #E4#                                     15
   ##########++#
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 4
   #################################################     NORTHEAST QUADRANT
 0 #           #  #     #   22      #  #           #  0
   #           #  #     #           #  #           #     KEY:
 1 #           #  #9b   #      21   #  #           #  1
   #           #  #++##########++####  #++##########     # wall
 2 #           +   9a                        +     #  2  + door/archway
   #############                             # 23  #
 3 +E2             9a                        #     #  3  E Entrance/exit
   #####################################     #######
 4                                     #           #  4
                                       #     #######
 5                                     #     #     #  5
                                       #     #     #
 6                                     #     #     #  6
                                       #     #     #
 7                                     #     #   24#  7
                                       #     ####++#
 8                                     #           #  8
                                       #     ####++#
 9     Hedge maze: See next section    #     #   25#  9
       for map and details.            #     #     #
10                                     #     #     # 10
                                       #     #######
11                                     #           # 11
                                       #     #######
12                                     #     +26   # 12
                                       #     #     #
13                                     #     #     # 13
                                       #  ####     #
14                                     #  #        # 14
                                       #  #        #
15                                     #E5#        # 15
                                       #++##########
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 6
   ##########++#                                         SOUTHWEST QUADRANT
 0 #   11   #E2#                                      0
   #        #  #                                         KEY:
 1 #        #  #                                      1
   #     ####  #                                         # wall
 2 #   10+     #                                      2  + door/archway
   #     #     #
 3 #     #     #                                      3  E Entrance/exit
   #######     #
 4 #           #                                      4
   #######     #
 5 #     #     #    Hedge maze: See next section      5
   #     #     #    for map and details.
 6 # 4   #     #                                      6
   #++####     #
 7 #           #                                      7
   #++####     #
 8 #     #     #                                      8
   #     #     #
 9 #     #     #                                      9
   #     #     #
10 #     #     #                                     10
   #######     #
11 #           #                                     11
   #######     #####################################
12 #     #                                       E5+ 12
   #  3  #                             #############
13 #     +                             + 1         # 13
   ##########++#  ####++##########++#  #           #
14 #           #  #           #     #  #           # 14
   #     2     #  #           #     #  #           #
15 #           #E1#           #     #E1#           # 15
   #############++###################++#############
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15      ECL Script 3
                                       #++##########     SOUTHEAST QUADRANT
 0                                     #E3#        #  0
                                       #  #        #     KEY:
 1                                     #  #        #  1
                                       #  #        #     # wall
 2                                     #  #        #  2  ~ pool
                                       #  ####     #     + door/archway
 3                                     #     +15   #  3
                                       #     #######     E Entrance/exit
 4                                     #           #  4
                                       #     #######
 5      Hedge maze: See next section   #     +     #  5
        for map and details.           #     #     #
 6                                     #     #     #  6
                                       #     #######
 7                                     +     #   6c#  7
                                       +E6   #     #
 8                                     +     +5c   #  8
                                       #     #  ####
 9                                     #     #  #~~#  9
                                       #     ####~~#
10                                     #     #13#14# 10
                                       #     #++#++#
11                                     #           # 11
   #####################################     #######
12 +E4                                  7b 7b+7a   # 12
   #                                         #     #
13 #                                         #     # 13
   #############  #######++#######++#  #++##########
14 #           +  #      5b   #   12#  #27         # 14
   #           #  #           #     #  #           #
15 #           #  #   6b      #     #  #           # 15
   #################################################
     0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15

(The outer perimeter of Valjevo Castle is three scripts and four maps to the
game; the location numbering does not usually match it or Gold Box Companion.)

Alarm: If you do something suspicious or aggressive, you may set off the alarm.
  This lasts for 60...120 minutes, and activates random encounters.  You can
  wait out the alarm in one of the safe locations listed below.

Random encounters: None, unless the alarm is active and you are not in one of
  locations 3, 4, 10...12, 17, or 23; then the chance of encountering a patrol
  is 1 in 21, or 1 in 3 in Search mode, with probability halved if you are
  indoors.

  A patrol consists of 1 6TH LVL FIGHTER (#75) and 5 HILL GIANT (#55) (Morale
  60, 3380 XP).  If you stole anything from the altar of Bane at location 11,
  you may be immediately attacked.  If not, you may "F"lee; "P"arleying will
  start combat if not disguised, or if you stole anything from the altar of
  Bane.  Otherwise, "S"ly or "N"ice start combat; "M"eek causes the guards to
  ask for a password, which is 'HARASH'; "H"aughty or "A"busive causes the
  guards to ask for your authority, which is 'TYRANTHRAXUS'.  Failure to give
  the correct response will start combat.

Resting: It is always safe to rest in locations 3, 4, 10...12, 17, and 23.  It
  is also safe to rest anywhere else, unless the alarm is active; you then have
  a 17% chance every 5 minutes of having rest disturbed by a patrol.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: The map layouts are nearly identical,
  and the overall theme is the same, but monsters in the Gold Box version are
  generally harder (like gnolls being replaced with fire giants) and the
  magical treasures are generally less powerful.

E1 - Exit to Stojanow Gate.

E2 - To Valjevo Castle Northwest Quadrant.

E3 - To Valjevo Castle Northeast Quadrant.

E4 - To Valjevo Castle Southwest Quadrant.

E5 - To Valjevo Castle Southeast Quadrant.

E6 - Entrance to Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze.  If you have not given the tower
  guards (whom you can't reach) at this gate a reason to be suspicious, they
  ask for a password.
  * Give the password: If Cadorna is with you, he slips you a note with it in
    Dethek.  'RHODIA' is correct and permits free passage.  An incorrect
    password does not arouse suspicion, and gives you a chance to "B"ash,
    "P"ick, or cast "K"nock the door, which still does not arouse suspicion.
    (I wasn't kidding about the guards' lack of competence.)  "B"ash may work
    but is unreliable; the Knock spell always works.
  * Force the gate open: The guards throw boulders at the party (12 THAC0 12
    attacks on random characters, 2d6 damage per hit) and set off the alarm
    (this does not cause you to lose disguise); then you get a chance to
    "B"ash, "P"ick or cast "K"nock as above.

  If you have either ever tried to force your way through this gate (the guards
  won't know if you tried forcing your way through the other one), or stolen
  anything from the altar of Bane at location 11, the guards will be
  suspicious: the result is as if you had tried to "force the gate open".

1 SW (12,13) - "You enter a building where women are washing clothes.  As you
  come in, they retreat to the corner looking fearfully at you.  You hear one
  of them whisper, 'They don't belong here; they must have come to kill
  Tyranthraxus.'"  (That's an interesting leap of logic.)

  The women will offer to disguise you, regardless of attitude.  You can choose
  whether or not to put on the disguise, which can help you evade enemy
  patrols.  Afterwards, if you:
  * "T"ie them up: avoids the negative repercussions of a "H"aughty or
    "A"busive attitude.
  * "K"ill them: "The women shriek and flee before you as you chop them down.
    The half-orc woman with hate in her eyes snarls 'Heroes!  Hah!'  Then
    her eyes glaze as she dies."  This has a 20% chance of making noise, which
    both sets off the alarm and cancels any disguise.
  * "L"eave: a "H"aughty attitude will cause your disguise to not actually
    work.  An "A"busive attitude will set off the alarm.

2 - Smithy.  Between 0:00 and 14:59, a smith and three fire giants work here.
  * "C"ombat results in your party surprising 1 4TH LVL FIGHTER (#41) and 3
    FIRE GIANT (#56) (Morale 30, 4018 XP).  The smith carries a Long Sword +1
    and Chain Mail +1.
  * "P"arley:
    * "H"aughty: 'I'm sorry, I can't take any more orders just now.  If it's
      important get authorization.  Now if you'll excuse me I have to get back
      to work.'
    * "S"ly or "A"busive: 'What?  Everyone knows that... Hey, you don't belong
      here!'  The smith and fire giants attack you (with no surprise).
    * "N"ice or "M"eek: "The smith wipes his brow and says, 'No, you never get
      totally used to the heat, but it's not that bad.  Now, if you'll excuse
      me I need to get back to work.'"

  If you defeat the smith and the fire giants, or if you come here after 15:00,
  you may take any of the nonmagical weapons or armor here; there is one of
  each common item.

3 - "You are in a storeroom full of coal."  This is always a safe place to
  rest.

4 - "You are in a standard meat smokehouse... Well maybe not quite standard.
  You feel a little sick as you look at the meat.  The smell and the smoke
  don't help either."  This is always a safe place to rest.

5 - This barracks is empty at night, but during the day you will encounter its
  hill giant soldiers.  If you "F"lee you will set off the alarm and lose your
  disguise.  "W"ait or "P"arley will start combat: 8 HILL GIANT (#55)
  (Morale 40, 5191 XP).  Your party receives bonuses of +2 to hit and damage if
  the giants are "putting on their armor", or +5 if they are "struggling out of
  bed".

6 - If you search here, you will find treasure: 1 XP, 11 gold.

7 - Hill giant guard.  If you are disguised, you may pass through location 7b
  without them noticing, but not location 7a where they are stationed.

  If they do notice you, and you stole anything from the altar of Bane at
  location 11, they immediately attack you and set off the alarm: fight 2 HILL
  GIANT (#55) (Morale 50, 1297 XP).

  If you start "C"ombat yourself, this will set off the alarm, but you will not
  lose any disguise.

  The giants will otherwise ask for a password.  You may either act "H"aughty
  and give your authority as 'TYRANTHRAXUS', or give the password 'HARASH' with
  any other attitude, and they will let you go.  Otherwise, they attack you
  (same effect as "C"ombat).

8 - If you pass through location 8a while disguised, and you haven't killed the
  6TH LVL FIGHTER (#75) (Morale 100, 136 XP; carries Long Sword +1) here, he
  confronts you:
  * "C"ombat: He pushes a button and warns you that a patrol is coming.  Either
    choice triggers the alarm and causes you to lose your disguise.  If you
    "S"tay and fight him instead of "R"un, after the combat you are immediately
    confronted by a patrol.
  * "F"lee: You successfully get away, but set off the alarm and lose your
    disguise.
  * "W"ait or "P"arley: "S"ly or "N"ice set off the alarm, but don't cause you
    to lose your disguise.  If you act "M"eek and give the password 'HARASH',
    or act "H"aughty or "A"busive and give your authority as 'TYRANTHRAXUS', he
    lets you go without incident.  An incorrect response behaves the same as
    "C"ombat.

  If you pass through location 8a while not disguised, the alarm goes off.

  If you enter location 8b and the fighter is still alive, he immediately
  attacks you (Morale 50), setting off the alarm, though this does not cause
  you to lose any disguise.

9 - This is similar to location 8, but the 6TH LVL FIGHTER (#84) (336 XP) may
  be helped by the fire giants from location 21.  If you attempt to pass
  through location 9a while not disguised, the fire giants will charge you; the
  only way to avoid combat is to "F"lee, which sets off the alarm.  If you
  attack the fighter in location 9b, you can catch him without the fire giants.

10 SW (1,2) - "You are in a building that was once a barracks but has now been
  converted to a temple of Bane.  At the far end of the room is a crude altar."

  A priest and two acolytes ask you to accept Bane's blessing:
  * "A"ccept blessing: All non-evil characters take 2d10+2 damage; the last
    character in your party may get hit two extra times.  If anyone took
    damage, this behaves as if you had tried to "L"eave.
  * "T"alk: The priest insists you accept the blessing of Bane.
  * "L"eave: "The priest shouts, 'What's this?  You aren't worshipers of Lord
    Bane!  Die impostors!'  He grabs the last rhinestone from a necklace and
    throws it at you.  A fireball explodes!"  Every character who fails to make
    a saving throw vs. spell takes 15 damage; then, every character takes 15
    damage.  The priest and his acolytes then attack you, as if you had tried
    to "K"ill them.
  * "K"ill them: You fight 1 LEVEL 5 CLERIC (#91) and 2 1ST LVL CLERIC (#90)
    (Morale 100, 450 XP).  The level 5 cleric carries a Mace +3, Plate Mail +1,
    and a Necklace of Missiles (6 charges).

11 SW (1,0) - Altar of Bane.  If you loot the offering box, you can get 37
  silver, but all characters will take 2d10+2 damage.  You may then take the
  two crossed swords; if you choose to, they are worth 400 XP, and both are
  Long Swords +3 (alignment lawful evil; anyone not lawful evil who tries to
  equip such a sword takes 5 damage).

  If you take anything from here, many guards in the castle will recognize you
  as blasphemers on sight and be automatically hostile.  Additionally, if you
  take the swords, any disguise from location 1 will no longer work.

12 SE (10,14) - The first time you enter this room, the ceiling caves in
  (THAC0 10 attack on a random character, 2d6 damage if it hits).  This is
  always a safe place to rest.

13 SE (14,10) - If you have been rewarded for completing the diplomatic mission
  to the Zhentil Keep Outpost (commission #13), "This is a small cell.  Chained
  to the wall is a man beaten to within an inch of his life.  As you open the
  door he looks up and you feel a shock... The man is Porphyrys Cadorna.  'In
  the name of Chantua, help me, please!  By all that's merciful help me.'  He
  begins to cough."  If you:
  * "R"elease him: 'Thank you!  Thank you!  I just thought that the pool was
    here!  There was nowhere else to go!  I have nowhere to go.  Take me with
    you?'  You may choose to let Cadorna follow you.
  * "L"eave him: Results in the following, in order:
    * 'Wait don't leave me here.  If you do I'll raise the alarm.'
    * 'Wait!  I know how to get through the main gates.  I can help you.'
    * 'I know the way through the hedge ... left right right ... for Chantua's
      sake!  Don't leave me!'
    * You finally do leave; the alarm actually does go off, and you will lose
      any disguise you have.
  * "K"ill him: He may beg and volunteer information once before you can
    actually do so.  This does not truly accomplish anything; the Phlan clerk
    will recognize that you did it, but recognition is all that happens.

  (The sequels behave as if Porphyrys Cadorna dies here.)

14 SE (15,10) - A well.  If you try to move into it, you get the option to dive
  in.  Your chosen character needs at least Constitution 12 to have any chance
  of reaching the bottom; if you do, you find a Long Sword +2 Flame Tongue
  (133 XP).  Your character then makes another check against Constitution +
  movement; a failure causes 1d6 damage from breathing in water.

15 SE (14,3) - 5 GIANT SNAKE (#60) (Morale 100, 216 XP) lair here.  You can't
  avoid combat.

16 NW (1,7) - You may catch the giants who live here sleeping; you may either
  sneak out, or attack them as they sleep.  If you choose the latter, you step
  on a loose creaky floorboard so you can't actually surprise them, and fight
  [4 during the day, 2 at night] FIRE GIANT (#56) (Morale 100, 2568 or 5136
  XP).

  Otherwise, the giants have set a small trap by the door; if you fail to
  detect it with Search mode, a bucket falls on the party (THAC0 10 attack on a
  random character, 1d4 damage if it hits).  You may "F"lee, but it sets off
  the alarm and causes you to lose any disguise; all other options lead to
  combat as above.

17 NW (1,3) - Officers' quarters.  The officer is not present, but 2 HILL GIANT
  (#55) (Morale 50, 1297 XP) are and confront you.  You may "F"lee, but it sets
  off the alarm and causes you to lose any disguise.  If you "P"arley with any
  attitude they will bother you no further.

  After you deal with the giants, this is always a safe place to rest.

18 NW (0,2) - If you search here, you find treasure: 200 gold and Potion of
  Speed (100 XP).

19 - "You enter a latrine.  The lack of bad smell gives you a general idea of
  the level of sanitation practiced by the inhabitants of the area."

20 - Mess hall.  "You are in a hall with long tables, benches and a great
  hearth at one end.  In the corners are heaps of garbage being picked over by
  some rats which flee at your entrance."

21 NE (9,1) - Fire giant barracks; the giants look up at you:
  * "C"ombat: Fight 4 FIRE GIANT (#56) (Morale 80, 5136 XP).
  * "F"lee: You set off the alarm and lose any disguise you may have.
  * "P"arley: If the alarm has gone off and you are undisguised, this starts a
    fight.  Otherwise, a "H"aughty or "S"ly attitude gets the giants to show
    you the list of passwords from location 22.  "N"ice or "M"eek attitudes
    lead to the giants telling you to get lost; "S"taying will start combat.
    An "A"busive attitude will also start combat.

22 NE (8,0) - You can search here to find the password list, if the fire giants
  did not already show it to you.  It has the patrol password 'HARASH' written
  in Espruar, and the gate password 'RHODIA' written in Dethek.

23 - Armory.  You may take any of the nonmagical weapons or armor here; there
  is one of each common item, and the supply is inexhaustible.  This is also
  always a safe place to rest.

24 - Kitchen.  "You enter a room that reeks of smoke and burned food.  You see
  three human slaves cooking meat, peeling potatoes, and being beaten by a
  vicious looking gnoll."  If you:
  * Kill the overseer and free the slaves: "The gnoll turns to flee.  As he
    runs by, one of the slaves trips him.  You advance and cut the overseer's
    throat.  Two of the slaves run quickly out the door.  The third approaches
    you with tears of gratitude in his eyes.  'I thank you for freeing me.
    Before I leave let me help you as best I can.'  He takes a slip of paper
    from the pouch of the dead gnoll.  'Here, you will need this.'"  It has
    'RHODIA' written upon it in Dethek.  "'It is today's password at the main
    gate into the hedge maze.  Alas, I can not help you with that for I have
    not been inside.  But I have heard the maze is deadly!'"
  * Go back outside: If you are not disguised, this sets off the alarm.
  * Talk to the overseer: The first time, the overseer threatens you with
    boiling oil.  After that, he makes good on the threat (THAC0 10 attack on a
    random character, 2d6 damage if it hits).

25 - Records office.  You can spend hours reading the records.  If you do:
  * If the alarm is currently active, there is a 50% chance a patrol will come
    by.
  * If it is 0:00 to 17:59, there is a 15% chance that a scribe will walk in.
    If "He drops his books and runs out the door", this will set off the alarm,
    but will not cause you to lose any disguise.

  If neither of those happens, you may discover:
  * "You find evidence that the Red Wizards of Thay are allied to
    Tyranthraxus."  (You'll get to meet the Red Wizards in later games of the
    series.)
  * "You are finding a pattern to Tyranthraxus's activities.  At first
    Tyranthraxus's followers were an unsophisticated horde of ill organized
    unhumans.  Now they are much more sinister.  The web of corruption he has
    spread is incredible in its scope.  His ultimate goal is to conquer all
    lands south of the Moonsea."  (Everything in this game takes place north of
    the Moonsea.  You'll get to travel south of the Moonsea in Curse of the
    Azure Bonds.)

26 - Scribes' office.  If you enter between 0:00 and 17:59, you will encounter
  six scribes working under the supervision of two officers.  The two officers
  will confront you (if you are not disguised, any response will set off the
  alarm):
  * "C"ombat: Fight 2 ENVOY (#87) (Morale 100, 433 XP), who each carries a
    Two-Handed Sword +2.
  * "F"lee: You set off the alarm and lose any disguise you may have.
  * "P"arley: If you are not disguised, the officers attack you.  Otherwise, if
    you act "M"eek and give the password 'HARASH', or act "H"aughty or
    "A"busive and give your authority as 'TYRANTHRAXUS', they leave you alone.
    Anything else causes them to attack you.
  If you have defeated the officers, you can search the office and find:
  * "You find hard evidence that Cadorna has been using you for his own ends
    and has been seeking the Pool of Radiance for himself."  Reading this is
    one of the ways to prove that Porphyrys Cadorna is a traitor.
  * "The following catches your eye, 'Do not be fooled by outward forms for
    you shall know me by my flaming aura. --Tyranthraxus'".
  * "You find a report indicating that the northern barbarians are ready for
    the take over of a strong leader and that the chief of the Raven Clan is
    allied to Tyranthraxus."

27 SE (12,14) - "You are in a deserted building.  There are nothing but very
  large cobwebs here."

SECTION 6.24.1 - Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze Overview
---------------------------------------------------

Plot background:

The Valjevo Castle hedge maze is the next layer of defense surrounding the
castle's inner tower.  Even the hedges can be deadly!

Strategy:

Good items may be found by defeating Al-Hyam Dazid at location 1, and the false
Tyranthraxus at location 5.

If you just want to pass through the maze as fast as possible, enter using the
northwest entrance, and take the risk of cutting through the eastern hedge maze
wall at (10,14).

SECTION 6.24.2 - Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze Details
--------------------------------------------------

     4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11
   #########################################################################
 4 #    1+                    "        +  "                          + 6   #  4
   #     #  """"""""""""""""  "  "  """#  "  "  """"  """"  """""""""####  #
 5 #     #                 "  "  "     #  "  "     "  "     "  "     #     #  5
   #  ####  """""""  """"  """"  """"  #  "  """"  "  "  """""""  """#######
 6 #  ####     "  "     "  "  "     "  #  "  "     "  "           "        #  6
   #######"""  "  """"  "  "  """"  """#  """"  """"  "  """"""""""  "  "  #
 7 +           "     "  "  "     "     #        "  "  "  "           "  "  #  7
   +E1   """"""""""  "  "  """"  """"  #  """""""  "  """"  """"""""""  "  #
 8 +                 "  "              #  "        "  "     "           "  #  8
   #  "  """""""  "  "  """"""""""  """#"""  """"  "  "  """"  """"""""""  #
 9 #  "        "  "  "  "        "     #     "  "  "  "     "  "           #  9
   #""""""  "  "  "  "  "  """"  """"""#  """"  "  "  "  "  "  "  """""""""#
10 #  "     "  "  "  "  "     "  "     #        "  "     "TP"  "  "        # 10
   #"""  """""""  "  "  "  "  "  """"  #     """"  """"""""""  "  "  """"  #
11 #  "  "        "  "  "  "TP"        +                    "     "     "  # 11
   #  "  "  """""""  "  "  #########################""""""  "     "  """"  #
12 #  "     "     "  "  "  #########################     "  "        "     # 12
   #  """""""  """"  "  "  #########################     "  """"""""""  "  #
13 #                 "  "  #########################     "        "  "  "  # 13
   #""""""  """"""""""  "  #########################     """""""  "  "  "  #
14 #        "           "E3+########################     "        "  "  "  # 14
   #  """""""  "  """""""""#########################  """"  """""""  "  """#
15 #  "        "           #########################                 "     # 15
   #++###################++#########################++###################++#
 0 #     "                 #############           #           "        "  #  0
   #"""  "  """""""  """"  #############           #"""""""""  "  """""""  #
 1 #  "  "           "     #############          5+  "           "        #  1
   #  "  "     """""""     #############           #  "  """"""""""  """"""#
 2 #  "  "           "     #############           #  "  "                 #  2
   #  "  """"""""""  "     #############           #  "  "  """"  """""""  #
 3 #     "        "  "     #############           #  "  "  "     "     "  #  3
   #  """"  "     "  """"""#########################  "  "  """""""  "  "  #
 4 #  "     "     "                    +        "TP"  "  "  "        "  "  #  4
   #  """"  "  "  """"""""""  """"     #  """"  "  "  "  "  "  """""""  """#
 5 #        "  "  "TP"     "  "        #     "  "     "  "  "  "  "     "  #  5
   #"""""""""  "  "  "  "  "  "  """"  #""""""  """"  "  "  "  "  "  """"""#
 6 #           "  "     "  "  "  "     #     "        "  "  "  "        "  #  6
   #  """"""""""  """"  "  "  """"  """#"""  """"""""""  "  "  """""""  "  #
 7 #  "           "     "  "        "  #              "  "                 +  7
   #  "  """"""""""  """"  "  """""""  #  """"  """"  "  "  """"""""""   E2+
 8 #  "  "              "  "  "        #     "     "  "  "     "           +  8
   #  "  "  """"""""""  "  """"  """"  #"""  """"  "  "  """"  "  """#######
 9 #  "     "           "  "     "  "  #  "     "  "  "     "  "     #     #  9
   #######"""  """""""  "  "  """"  "  #  """"  """"  """"  """""""  #     #
10 # 3  3+     "  "     "  "     "  "  #     "  "  "                 #     # 10
   #  ####"""""""""  """"  """"  "  "  #"""  "  "  """"""""""""""""  #     #
11 # 3  3+           "              "  +        "                    + 2   # 11
   #########################################################################
     4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11

ECL Script 5
KEY: # wall     + door/archway   TP Teleporter
     " hedge    E Entrance/exit

Hedges: You can step through a hedge ("), but every time you do so, a random
  character must make a successful saving throw vs. poison or take 201 damage.
  This doesn't count as poison damage for the Slow Poison or Neutralize Poison
  spells.

Random encounters: None, unless the alarm is active and you are not in
  locations 1, 2, or 5; the chance of a random encounter is then 1 in 21, or
  1 in 3 if you are in Search mode.

  The random encounters are with 4 GIANT SNAKE (#60) (Morale 100).  You can
  "F"lee, but "P"arleying will simply start combat.

Resting: It is always safe to rest in locations 1, 2, or 5.  It is safe to rest
  anywhere else as well, unless the alarm is active; then every 5 minutes rest
  has a 17% chance of being disturbed by a random encounter.
Differences from the tabletop adventure: The maps are almost identical; the
  monsters in the maze are somewhat stronger in the Gold Box version.

E1 [location 21] - Exit to Valjevo Castle Northwest Quadrant.

E2 [location 22] - Exit to Valjevo Castle Southeast Quadrant.

E3 - Entrance to Valjevo Castle Inner Tower.

TP [location 7] - Teleporter to one of the other three teleporters, chosen at
  random.

1 NW (5,4) - Quarters of Al-Hyam Dazid.  Al-Hyam is trying to learn how
  Tyranthraxus got his great power; Tyranthraxus is keeping him under watch and
  trying to learn all he can from him.  He is not interested in combat, and if
  you threaten him twice he will give the party all his notes (Journal Entry
  30).  If you attack him, you face 1 AL-HYAM DAZID (#86) (Morale 50, 1423 XP);
  he carries Bracers AC 3, a Ring of Fire Resistance, and a Wand of Lightning
  (20 charges).

2 SE (10,11) - A group of giants is hiding here, avoiding work, and arguing.
  * If you stole anything from the altar of Bane at Valjevo Castle 11, or the
    alarm is active and you are not disguised, they attack immediately.
  * Otherwise, they'll ask you if frogs and toads are the same thing.  (For the
    record: toads are a proper subset of frogs, so the correct answer is no --
    all toads are frogs, but not vice versa.)
    * "A"ttack: Fight 4 FIRE GIANT (#56) (Morale 50, 5136 XP).
    * "Y"es: "As the giant turns in triumph to his companions, the others pick
      up their clubs.  'What they know?  We knock dumb little men's brains
      out!'  'You no hurt them.  Them my buddies!'  They argue for a little bit
      and then one says, 'Hey, what we fighting for?  It's all fault of them!'
      'Yeh!'"  This has the same result as "A"ttack.
    * "N"o: "As the other giants burst into howls of laughter the one who
      talked to you turns red and says, 'You lie!  You lie to make me fool!  I
      smash you!'  Before he can attack the others grab him and say, 'You
      better go little men.'"  You have another chance to "L"eave; "S"taying
      will result in a fight ('Oh well.  Can't let Herdrek have all fun.')

3 - This tower is guarded by 3 HILL GIANT (#55) (Morale 60, 1946 XP).
  * If you "P"arley with a "H"aughty or "A"busive attitude, and say that
    'TYRANTHRAXUS' sent you, they let you go: 'Oh, we sorry! Just doing job!
    Please no tell?  We let you... We stay at post.  Make sure no one go by!'
  * Anything else results in combat; the giants may ask for a non-existent
    password first.

5 SE (3,1) - Throne room of false Tyranthraxus.  The false Tyranthraxus
  confronts the party:
  * "C"ombat or "W"ait: fight 1 TYRANITHRAXUS [sic] (#92) and 2 6TH LVL THIEF
    (#93) (Morale 60, 1701 XP).  The false Tyranthraxus has Long Sword +5, Ring
    of Protection +3, and Gauntlets of Ogre Power.  You also claim his treasure
    of 1 jewelry and 8 gems.  This also sets of the alarm and causes you to
    loses any disguise.
  * "F"lee: works, but sets off the alarm.
  * "P"arley:
    * "H"aughty ('Arrogant knave, feel the power of Tyranthraxus!') or "S"ly
      ('Boy, this crown is heavy.  Oh, well it's a living.  What does
      Tyranthraxus wan... Oops! Get them!') start combat as above, but cause no
      loss of disguise.
    * "N"ice or "M"eek: 'Begone or feel the wrath and power of Tyranthraxus!'
      If you then leave, that sets off the alarm; if you stay, the effect is
      the same as "H"aughty or "S"ly.
    * "A"busive: add together Party Strength and the current character's
      Charisma modifier:
      * Score is less than 85: "He seems to collapse.  'All right.  I'm not
        Tyranthraxus.  He just hired me to impersonate him.  It's not a bad
        life, but, hey!  I can tell which way the wind's blowing.'"  If you let
        him go, you can claim his treasure; otherwise acts as "H"aughty.
      * Score is 85 or more: acts as "H"aughty.
      (These should be the other way around.)

6 NE (10,4) - Trolls live in this tower.  If you do not "F"lee, you fight 8
  TROLL (#31) (Morale 100, 1084 XP).

SECTION 6.25.1 - Valjevo Castle Inner Tower Overview
----------------------------------------------------

Plot background:

Tyranthraxus makes his lair here in the inner tower of Valjevo Castle.  Defeat
him and Phlan will be free!

Strategy:

You can defeat Genheeris at location 7 for his wand, but you can also just go
straight to the final confrontation at location 8.

SECTION 6.25.2 - Valjevo Castle Inner Tower Details
---------------------------------------------------

Lower Level                Upper Level                  ECL Script 7

                             1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8
#########################  #########################    KEY: # wall
#           #           #  #        #   E3   #     #  4      ~ illusionary wall
#           ####        #  #        #  #\\#  #     #         + door/archway
#           #\\#        #  #    7   #  ####  #    4#  5      \ stairs
#           #\\#        #  ####++####  ####  ####++#         ~ Pool of Radiance
+E1         #E2#        #  #    6+   10####        #  6
#~~~~~#######~~####     #  #     #\\#############++#         E Entrance/exit
#     \\\\\\\  \\\\ 5   #  #     #\\##########     #  7
#########################  #######\\##########     #
                           #       8   #######     #  8
                           #           #######++####
                           #           ####        #  9
                           #  ~~~~     ####        #
                           #  ~~~~     ####        # 10
                           ################        #
                           ################        # 11
                           #########################
                             1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8

Random encounters: None.

Resting: It is always safe to rest anywhere.

Differences from the tabletop adventure: Tyranthraxus only has 2 level 8
  fighters defending him in the tabletop version, instead of the 12 here.  The
  possessed bronze dragon's name is Srossar; in the tabletop version, he only
  has 20% magic resistance, but has the standard repulsion breath and
  spellcasting abilities of an ancient bronze dragon, neither of which is
  present here.

E1 - Exit to Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze.

E2 [location 2] - Stairs up to Upper Level.

E3 [location 3] - Stairs down to Lower Level.

4 (8,5) - "You are in an empty room.  The only feature is a trap door in the
  center."  If you open it, and you have not killed the medusa at location 5,
  your character must save vs. petrification or be turned to stone.  You may
  then jump through the trap door to location 5; if you do, all characters take
  3d6 damage.

5 - Lair of a medusa; Tyranthraxus keeps the medusa here to trouble intruders
  who didn't find the secret door in the previous room.  You can "F"lee the
  medusa; "P"arley has the same result as "C"ombat: 1 MEDUSA (#49) (Morale 100,
  150 XP).  You can safely fight the medusa if everyone equips a mirror.  You
  can also just skip it since it's worth little XP and has no treasure.

6 (2,6) - A messenger that works for Genheeris and Tyranthraxus is here; he is
  1 1ST LVL THIEF (#45) (Morale 100, 2 XP).
  * If you stole anything from the altar of Bane at Valjevo Castle 11: "The
    thief shouts 'Blasphemers!' and attacks."
  * If you "P"arley with an "A"busive attitude: causes the messenger to attack.
    (I don't think messengers are usually this suicidal.)
  * If you "P"arley with any other attitude: "'Hey look, could you keep quiet?
    I just got back from the north and I'm tired.  Okay?'  A moment later a
    voice from calls from the other doorway, 'Messenger!'  The man gets up with
    a sigh and goes into the office.  A minute later he comes out putting
    papers into a pouch and goes out the door."

7 (2,5) - "You enter a room furnished as the apartment of a wealthy if
  eccentric merchant."  Genheeris looks up from a desk:
  * If you killed the messenger at location 6:
    "A sudden look of fear comes over his face.  'If you've come from
    Tyranthraxus I can offer a better deal.  If you kill him instead of me I
    will make you all generals!'"  His deal includes joining as an NPC if you
    have room: GENHEERIS (#88) (Morale 100).  Genheeris is not actually able to
    memorize spells once his currently memorized spells are expended (the game
    engine doesn't properly support his being level 7).  If you refuse this
    offer, he attacks you; you are awarded 756 XP and his Wand of Lightning (56
    charges) if you win.
  * If you did not kill the messenger:
    * "C"ombat, or "P"arleying with a "H"aughty, "S"ly, or "A"busive attitude,
      frightens Genheeris, which behaves the same as killing the messenger.
    * "P"arleying with a "N"ice or "M"eek attitude: 'Tell Al-Hyam Dhazid to
      execute Phase 2 of Plan A.  Dismissed.'  If you ignore this order and
      "S"tay, this will also frighten Genheeris.

8 (3,8) - "You are in the audience hall of Tyranthraxus, conqueror of Phlan.
  The ceiling has been torn away leaving the entire section of the tower open
  to the sky.  In the center of the room is a glowing pool.  An ancient bronze
  dragon, surrounded by a fiery aura, rises from where it was coiled nearby.
  Two guards move to bar your path.  The dragon looks at you with malevolence.
  'Guards, kill these pests.'"

  If you do anything other than "F"lee, you fight 12 8TH LVL FIGHTER (#85)
  (Morale 100, 8390 XP); each fighter carries a Two-Handed Sword +2, Plate Mail
  +2, and a Ring of Protection +3.  (Where did those extra ten fighters come
  from?)

  If you defeat his guards, "The dragon looks at you with interest.  'You are
  indeed mighty warriors.  Even so, there is no hope of your success.  But you
  interest me.  If you join me I will make you the commanders of the armies
  that will sweep the Moonsea.  I can not be defeated, you know.  Will you join
  me?'"

  Everyone in the party then makes a decision.  NPCs make their own decisions:
  * all good and neutral NPCs always choose to fight Tyranthraxus;
  * Genheeris has specific logic to choose to fight Tyranthraxus;
  * all other evil NPCs always choose to join Tyranthraxus.
  If everyone joins Tyranthraxus, the game ends; otherwise, he attacks: fight 1
  TYRANITHRAXUS [sic] (#66) (Morale 100, 611 XP).

  If you win, Tyranthraxus's spirit departs from the bronze dragon's body, and
  the spirit threatens to possess one of the characters -- but Bane pulls
  Tyranthraxus into the pool before he can do so.  (The graphics differ
  depending on how many people you have in your party: 1, 2, 3, or 4+.)  The
  party then returns to New Phlan victoriously.

  To win this series of battles more easily, use the Dust of Disappearance from
  the Temple of Bane.  It's not like there is anything better to save it for
  (no items survive transfer to Curse of the Azure Bonds).  It makes both
  battles much easier; you can move away from the fighters and they won't do
  anything if there is no character adjacent, and Tyranthraxus likewise cannot
  use his deadly electrical breath attack.  Other buffs long-lasting enough to
  cast before the first fight are Enlarge and Resist Fire.

  You can continue combat after defeating the fighters, to heal and cast buffs.
  If you didn't use the Dust of Disappearance, cast all the Mirror Image and
  Blink spells you have then.  One useful buff here is Protection from Good,
  because Tyranthraxus is actually lawful good (that's the alignment of the
  body he is possessing).

  Casting Animate Dead once you have slain several of the fighters in the first
  wave may give you several additional allies.

  Tyranthraxus is vulnerable to any wand (especially the Wand of Paralyzation),
  which his magic resistance does not fully protect against.  (Tyranthraxus
  still may get a saving throw.)

  (You can return here to defeat Tyranthraxus repeatedly.  This is a bug in the
  script, which writes the "Tyranthraxus defeated" flag to the wrong location.)

10 (4,6) - If Genheeris is in the party, he leaves the party here without
  notice.


SECTION 7.1 - Mechanics Introduction
------------------------------------

The Gold Box games are fundamentally based on the three standard AD&D 1st
Edition (D&D 1E) rulebooks: the Player's Handbook, the Dungeon Master's Guide,
and the Monster Manual.  Some rules from Unearthed Arcana (mostly items) are
applied, as well as some monsters from Monster Manual II.  The major exception
to this is THAC0, which is (mostly) a 2E phenomenon; 2E came out not too long
after Pool of Radiance did.  D&D 3E did not exist until years after the last
Gold Box game was released.

"D&D 1E" is an unambiguous term for "AD&D 1st Edition"; the editions before it
are usually referred to as OD&D and BECMI, which do not come up as often in
CRPGs.

The tabletop game uses dice of 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 20 sides.  The notation XdY
indicates the sum of rolling X Y-sided dice; a standard roll of two cubical
dice is represented as 2d6 and yields a number between 2 and 12.

The Gold Box games predate the invention of modern robust pseudorandom number
generators (the Mersenne Twister was not invented until 1997), so random
numbers in this game are not rigorously random.  As is typical for pseudorandom
number generators that old, you will often get clustering effects.  (Example:
if the game rolls d20 100 times, on average you will actually get 5 of each
number, but the 1s and 20s will tend to cluster together more than you would
expect statistically.  This effect is clearest when casting Fireball; you will
get both very low and very high damage rolls far more often than would happen
if the die rolls were truly random.)

Many of the rules here apply to all the Gold Box games, with known exceptions
indicated.  The major exception is spellcasting classes in the Dragonlance
games, which have their own rules.

SECTION 7.2 - Hit Points and Status Conditions
----------------------------------------------

Hit points should almost need no introduction.  A character is knocked
unconscious if reduced to 0 hit points or fewer.  Between -1 and -9 hit points,
1 hit point is lost every round, unless one of the following happens: another
character issues the "B"andage command (which has unlimited range), you cast
any cure spell on the character, or you win the combat.  Any of these will
bring the PC up to 0 hit points and stabilize the character.  At -10 or
fewer hit points, the PC dies.  Nothing else can harm such an unconscious
character.

(Being reduced below 0 hit points doesn't debilitate you as the tabletop game
does, nor does it outright kill you as in 2E or most classic CRPGs.  Also, the
death from massive damage rule introduced in 2E does not exist in 1E or the
Gold Box games.)

When rolling hit points at level 1, the minimum hit point roll is 2/3 of the
number of sides of the die.

Fleeing a combat will result in the permanent loss of any disabled characters
left behind.

Death is much harder to fix than in most modern CRPGs; the standard Raise Dead
spell results in permanent Constitution loss (though it both always works and
works on elves, neither of which is expected behavior).  The higher-level
Resurrection spell is not available at Pool of Radiance temples.  If you are
not above exploiting bugs, you can raise a Dead character by casting Cause
Light Wounds (which will not always work, as you need to succeed on a touch
attack roll) or Burning Hands (always works in this game) in combat.

Animated results from casting Animate Dead on a Dead character.  Such a
character is under the control of the computer, and will only engage in
physical combat (no spells or items).  It can only be fixed with the Raise Dead
spell.  Animated characters count as undead and may be turned or destroyed by
enemy clerics as zombies.  They are killed if reduced to 0 HP, and are
permanently killed if level-drained (not an actual D&D 1E rule as far as I
know; likely in place to stop players from gaining any advantage from
deliberate level drain).

Stoned (character turned into a statue) can be fixed with a Stone to Flesh
spell, which in this game you can only get at a temple (even though it's not
a clerical spell).

Gone means just that -- a Gone character is permanently dead and irrecoverable
(aside from special in-game circumstances, or restoring or editing a saved
game).

Poison in D&D 1E does not work in the classic CRPG way of causing gradual hit
point loss.  It instead "kills" you if you fail your saving throw.  This form
of death may be fixed with the Neutralize Poison spell, which in this game may
only be cast in temples.  The Slow Poison spell will temporarily work to revive
the character, and will work in the middle of combat, but at the end of that
spell's duration will cause the PC to die outright if you do not get Neutralize
Poison cast before that.

Blinded characters receive a -4 penalty to all of attack rolls, Armor Class,
and saving throws.  (They do not treat all enemies as invisible, as they do
in the tabletop game.)

Disease will drain 1 hit point every 10 minutes (this will not cause hit points
to drop below 1), as well as 1 Strength every hour (this will not cause
Strength to drop below 3, but is permanent).  Disease will also prevent proper
hit point restoration.  This can be cured by the Cure Disease spell, Keoghtum's
Ointment, or (in later games) a paladin's power.

Mummy rot is a separate condition.  You have 1d6 months to survive; at the end
of every month, the victim loses 2 points of Charisma permanently (minimum 3).
At the end of this period, the victim dies permanently.  Also, magical healing
does not work, and natural healing is slowed by 90% to 1 hit point every 10
days.  Cure Disease will cure mummy rot.

Charmed is a condition caused by a variety of spells (Charm Person, Snake
Charm) or some monster special attacks.  A charmed creature will fight for the
other side while charmed, though it cannot be commanded.  A physical attack by
a charmed creature's ally targeting the charmed creature automatically breaks
the charm.  (Magical attacks do not have this effect.)  The manual says that
you can keep charmed enemies after combat, but this is not true -- they will
instead disappear together with whatever treasure they were carrying.  Aside
from a physical attack, this can be fixed with another charm spell (though you
will still be unable to actually command the character), or Dispel Magic.

Helplessness is caused in combat by a variety of spells (Sleep, Stinking Cloud,
Hold Person) or some monster special attacks.  Any physical attack on a
helpless defender automatically hits and sets defender status to dying with -5
hit points.  (This is only supposed to happen in D&D 1E; in 2E and later, extra
conditions apply if you want to automatically slay a helpless defender.)

SECTION 7.3 - Time
------------------

There are 10 segments in 1 minute; (segments are not tracked outside combat)
           10 minutes in 1 turn; ("minute" and "round" are synonymous)
              6 turns in 1 hour; ("round" and "turn" are not the same)
             24 hours in 1 day; (a "week" of 7 days exists in the base rules)
              30 days in 1 month; (always, like in Middle-earth)
            12 months in 1 year; (13-month years often are the case elsewhere)
            256 years as the engine time limit.

Other time units:
* When resting, the Gold Box games also considers a tick of 5 minutes, but that
  is not elsewhere used or tracked.
* The tabletop game has a "week" of 7 days, but that is never considered here.
* The Forgotten Realms have a "tenday" of 10 days, but that is not used in Pool
  of Radiance; it does show up in some other D&D Gold Box games.

The standard Forgotten Realms calendar adds extra days to bring the year to 365
or 366 days (and is always a pure solar calendar like the modern Gregorian
calendar), though this intercalation does not occur in the Gold Box games.

Units of time longer than a day have very little influence on gameplay.   You
need to gain about 20 years before aging starts to become a problem at all, yet
you do not normally age by means other than by casting Haste (see below for
exception).  The effects of old age are not implemented by Pool of Radiance
even then.  In later games you can find and even buy Elixirs of Youth to reduce
your age anyway.

The sun rises at 00:00 and sets at 14:00; this always applies, as the Gold Box
games have an eternal equinox.  The day/night cycle usually does not affect
gameplay; the major exception is that the shops and city hall in New Phlan are
only open during the day.

It takes 1 minute to move forward one square in the first-person view, and 10
minutes to thoroughly search the current square.  Moving in the overland view
takes 12 hours per square.

In the Gold Box games, there is rarely urgency to hurry, even if you are
pursuing bad guys; urgency is usually implemented by making it difficult or
impossible to rest.  The main exception in this game is that the Valhingen
Graveyard mission will get harder as you progress; even then, you are better
off taking the time to become as powerful as you can before undertaking it.

Combat is divided into rounds; 1 round is 1 minute (this is different from D&D
3E and later).  A round is divided into segments (10 in both practice and
theory) which last roughly several seconds each.  Time spent in combat does
advance the game clock, but individual segments do not do so.

If you remove a character from your party, the character is frozen in time,
including any timed effects (which are remembered).

The Gold Box game takes place early in 1358 DR (typical for Forgotten Realms
1E tabletop gaming); the Adventurer's Journal references the Flight of the
Dragons happening in the Year of the Worm (1356 DR) two years ago.  The
tabletop version explicitly takes place in 1357 DR, in the months of Mirtul
(May) and Kythorn (June), four months before the tabletop Curse of the Azure
Bonds.

In D&D 2E and later, Pool of Radiance is retconned to take place in 1340 DR,
and what happens is the novel.  Pools of Darkness, the last of the game series
(second of the novel series), then takes place in 1350 DR.  The Gold Box games
take place in an alternate timeline, and anything happening in 1358 DR and
later that happens in D&D 2E or later sources generally can't happen.  Many
events revolve around the Time of Troubles, which shakes up godly power and
can't happen in the Gold Box timeline.

The game can keep track of 256 years of play (equal to 3,072 months, 92,160
days, 2,211,840 hours, 13,271,040 turns, or 132,710,400 minutes).  Once that
much time has elapsed, some strange bugs kick in -- your characters will age by
1 year every minute, for instance.  (This is a de facto time limit on play --
almost all adventure games, CRPGs, or strategy games have one in some fashion.)

There is no in-game way to know how much time has elapsed, even though the
engine has that information.  Don't worry about the time limit; even with
leisurely play, the game shouldn't take more than several in-game years.

SECTION 7.4 - Experience and Gaining Levels
-------------------------------------------

D&D popularized the very concept of gaining experience (XP) and gaining
discrete power-ups at levels of experience.  The amount of experience needed to
gain a level is listed under the section for each individual class.

Characters must be Okay at the end of a battle to receive experience; just
having positive hit points is not sufficient.  Any sleep or paralysis is still
okay, which doesn't necessarily happen even in other D&D computer adaptations.
Single-classed characters with at least 16 in all primary statistics receive a
10% bonus to experience earned.

Monsters are worth experience, listed in the Detailed Bestiary.  In the
specific case of a duel, defeating your opponent is worth 100 XP per hit die.

Treasure can be worth experience too.  Experience for magical items varies by
item.  Any magical item with a plus is worth 400 XP per plus.  For other cases,
see the Magic Items section.  (This is different from the standard rule of
thumb in the tabletop game, where experience value is 20% of the gold value of
the item.)

(This seems strange, as treasure these days is almost always treated as its own
reward, but in the days before D&D 1E, treasure was the primary way to get
experience.  That meant that you would find gold for no other reason than to
get experience, which in turn led to the problem of having gold and nothing to
spend it on.  Yes, that problem predates the home computer.)

You do not gain experience for a monster or anything it carries if its name is
blue (i.e., monster is charmed) at the time it is killed.

Any character who ran away, is unconscious or dead, or is otherwise not in play
will take an experience share but not actually gain it.

Unlike most modern games, gaining a level is not automatic.  You must go to a
class-specific training hall to do so (this is only possible in New Phlan), and
pay 1000 gold (200 platinum).

You cannot gain more than one level in one class at a time.  If you have enough
experience to go up more than one level in one class, doing so will cause you
to lose just enough experience so that you are 1 experience point short of
another level; this will not cause you to lose already earned levels in a
different class.  The traditional Gold Box way to get that next experience
point is to get into a tavern brawl.

If you are a multi-classed character (only non-humans may multi-class, and in
fact there's not much point in playing a non-human if you do not), experience
is evenly divided between your classes.  (This is always rounded down, which
is not the case in the tabletop game.)  This will mean you will progress in
your classes at different rates.  This division happens even if you have
reached the maximum level for one of your classes.

When gaining a level as a multi-classed character, the normal rules from the
tabletop game or later Gold Box games for gaining maximum hit points do not
apply.  Instead, follow the following steps:
  (1) roll hit point die for the level gained
  (2) add all the Constitution modifiers for *every* class the character has
  (3) divide by the number of classes the character has, rounding down
  (4) if below 1, set to 1
For levels beyond where you roll a die, you instead gain a fixed specific
number of hit points if single-classed (and should gain 1 if multi-classed,
though that rule is not properly applied until Secret of the Silver Blades).

Dual-classing, which only humans can do, is not implemented in Pool of
Radiance.  It is in later games, so you can plan for it.  You must have at
least 15 in the primary statistics of your original class, and at least 17 in
the primary statistics of your destination class.  You may not use most
abilities of the old class, other than hit points, until your new class's level
is higher.  You may then use all the abilities of the old class freely, except
for the ability to wear armor if you want to cast magic-user spells (this does
not apply if you were a ranger of 9th level or higher) or if you want to use
thief abilities.  Tabletop game rules permit you to change classes more than
once so long as you never return to a previous class, but you may only ever do
so once per character in the Gold Box games.

Non-humans have a racial limit to how many levels they can gain in most
classes, which often depend on the class's primary statistic.  This was one of
the most hated rules of 1E/2E before it was dropped in 3E.  Thieves and humans
have no such restrictions.  This is in addition to the limits imposed by Pool
of Radiance itself; these game level limits are extended as you move on to the
sequels, but racial level limits never are.

Some undead have a level-draining attack -- one of the most feared attacks in
1E/2E.  If such an attack hits, the affected character will lose one or two
levels and the corresponding experience; multi-classed characters lose the
levels requiring the most experience.  The Restoration spell (normally 7th
level, but you can find quite a few scrolls with it as treasure) will mostly
fix this, but will only restore just enough experience to restore the lost
level.

(No, there is no way I've been able to find to exploit deliberately draining
yourself.  This generally exists in any game with level-draining that doesn't
go out of its way to prevent it, and SSI looks like it spent significant
development time doing that; my standard example of a CRPG where you *can* is
Ultima 5.)

SECTION 7.5.1 - Statistic: Strength
-----------------------------------

          +To  +To  Carry -Open Doors-  Monster with
   Score  Hit  Dam  Capac   Easy  Hard  this strength
     1-3   -3   -2    162    1/6     -
       3   -3   -1    162    1/6     -
     4-5   -2   -1    262    1/6     -
     6-7   -1    0    362    1/6     -
     8-9    0    0    512    2/6     -
   10-11    0    0    512    2/6     -
   12-13    0    0    612    2/6     -
   14-15    0    0    712    2/6     -
      16    0   +1    862    3/6     -
      17   +1   +1   1012    3/6     -
      18   +1   +2   1262    3/6     -
18/01-50   +1   +3   1512    3/6     -
18/51-75   +2   +3   1762    4/6     -
18/76-90   +2   +4   2012    4/6     -
18/91-99   +2   +5   2512    4/6   1/6
   18/00   +3   +6   3512    5/6   2/6  Ogre
      19   +3   +7  *4512   *7/8   3/6  Hill giant
      20   +3   +8   5512   *7/8   3/6  Stone giant
      21   +4   +9   6512  *9/10   4/6  Frost giant
      22   +4  +10   8012 *11/12   4/6  Fire giant
      23   +5  +11   9512 *11/12   5/6  Cloud giant
      24   +6  +12  12512 *19/20   7/8  Storm giant
      25   +7  +14  15512 *23/24 *9/10  Titan

"+To-hit" only affects melee attacks, not missile attacks.
"+To-dam" affects primary melee weapon damage; penalties cannot cause damage to
  drop below 1 unless you cannot cause damage to begin with.  It does not
  affect thrown weapons (this does happen in D&D 2E), and it also does not
  affect missiles shot from a launcher unless you are firing from a Fine
  Composite Long Bow.
"Carry capac" measures unencumbered carrying capacity; you can actually carry
  up to 988 extra coins of weight beyond the limit without magical assistance.
  Encumbered carrying capacity is not precisely codified in D&D 1E.  The
  carry limit for Strength 19 is incorrect by D&D 1E rules; it should be 5012
  (though this makes the resulting code simpler).
"Open doors" is the standard probability for opening a stuck or heavy door in
  one try.  If you try to "B"ash open a door, this chance of success is
  checked for every character, depending on the door difficulty, as above but:
  * A character with Strength 19...25 cannot bash down an easy-to-bash door at
    all (which is a bug).
  * A character with Strength 25 (not possible without cheating) is guaranteed
    to bash down a hard-to-bash door.

Non-human fighters have a maximum level dependent on their Strength; see
Class: Fighter for details.

Strength is the primary statistic for fighters; a single-classed fighter with
  Strength 16 or more receives a 10% bonus to experience earned.  Strength is
  also a primary statistic for paladins and rangers in later games.
A fighter with 18 Strength also gets to roll percentile dice for exceptional
  Strength; non-warriors do not get this roll.
The tabletop class minima for Strength are not enforced except when you first
  roll a character.

SECTION 7.5.2 - Statistic: Intelligence
---------------------------------------

This is only of any importance at all for classes that can cast magic-user
spells.

There are minimum Intelligence requirements for casting 5th and higher level
magic-user spells (which won't be an issue at all until later in Curse of the
Azure Bonds).

Intelligence is the primary statistic for magic-users; a single-classed magic-
user with Intelligence 16 or more receives a 10% bonus to experience earned.
Intelligence is also a primary statistic for rangers in later games.

Number of languages you can learn is never relevant; the chance to learn a
spell is 100% if it can be learned at all; and there are no minimum or
maximum numbers of spells you can learn per level.  (Intelligence affects all
of these in the tabletop game.)

Intelligence also does not grant you bonus spells, as it does in later D&D
editions.  At low levels, a magic-user is going to run out of spells quickly.
Not for nothing is a level 1 magic-user nicknamed "Sleep spell on legs".
The tabletop class minima for Intelligence are not enforced except when you
first roll a character.

SECTION 7.5.3 - Statistic: Wisdom
---------------------------------

       Cleric
Score  Spells
  3-8  not eligible to be a cleric
 9-12  no bonus spells
   13  Bonus L1 spell
   14  Bonus L1 spell
   15  Bonus L2 spell
   16  Bonus L2 spell
   17  Bonus L3 spell; minimum needed for 6th level cleric spells
   18  Bonus L4 spell; minimum needed for 7th level cleric spells

Wisdom is the primary statistic for clerics; a single-classed cleric with
Wisdom 16 or more receives a 10% bonus to experience earned.  Wisdom is also a
primary statistic for both paladins and rangers in later games.

The tabletop game rules for a chance of spell failure below Wisdom 13 are not
enforced, and the minima for Wisdom are not enforced except when you first
roll a character.  Wisdom above 18 also will not grant additional spells as
described in DD.

The Wisdom saving throw bonus described in the D&D 1E PHB is not implemented.

SECTION 7.5.4 - Statistic: Dexterity
------------------------------------

                     ---- Thief Skill Adjustments -----
                                   Find/
       React   Def.    Pick  Open Remove   Move Hide in
Score  /Miss   Adj.  Pocket Locks  Traps Silent Shadows
    3     -3     +4     N/A   N/A    N/A    N/A     N/A
    4     -2     +3     N/A   N/A    N/A    N/A     N/A
    5     -1     +2     N/A   N/A    N/A    N/A     N/A
    6      0     +1     N/A   N/A    N/A    N/A     N/A
  7-8      0      0     N/A   N/A    N/A    N/A     N/A
    9      0      0    -15%  -10%   -10%   -20%    -10%
   10      0      0   -10%*   -5%   -10%   -15%     -5%
   11      0      0     -5%     0    -5%   -10%       0
   12      0      0       0     0      0    -5%       0
   13      0      0       0     0      0      0       0
   14      0      0       0     0      0      0       0
   15      0     -1       0     0      0      0       0
   16     +1     -2       0  +5%*      0      0       0
   17     +2     -3     +5%  +10%      0    +5%     +5%
   18     +3     -4    +10%  +15%    +5%   +10%    +10%
   19     +3     -4    +15%  +20%   +10%   +12%    +12%
   20     +3     -4   +20%* +25%*  +15%*  +15%*   +15%*
   21     +4     -5   +25%* +30%*  +20%*  +18%*   +18%*
   22     +4     -5   +30%* +35%*  +25%*  +20%*   +20%*
   23     +4     -5   +35%* +40%*  +30%*  +23%*   +23%*
   24     +5     -6   +40%* +45%*  +35%*  +25%*   +25%*
   25     +5     -6   +45%* +50%*  +40%*  +30%*   +30%*

"React/Miss" modifies both:
  * initiative;
  * to-hit bonus for missile launchers (bows, crossbows, slings), and also
    javelins, holy water, flasks of oil and boulders.
"Def. Adj." is the modifier to AC (the lower, the better).
"Pick Pocket", "Open Locks", "Find/Remove Traps", "Move Silent", and "Hide in
  Shadows are the percentage adjustments to thief abilities:
  * These are not immediately applied to a brand new character.
  * The Dexterity 10 adjustment for Pick Picket is actually -19%.
  * The Dexterity 16 adjustment for Open Locks is actually -5%.
  * If Dexterity is not 9...19, the actual adjustment is the result of an
    out-of-bounds array access.  As the game does not support Dexterity 20+,
    the values given above are what are supposed to happen.

Dexterity is the primary statistic for thieves; a single-classed thief with
Dexterity 16 or more receives a 10% bonus to experience earned.

The tabletop class minima for Dexterity are not enforced except when you first
roll a character.

There is no non-cheating way I am aware of to actually obtain Dexterity 21+ in
any of the Gold Box games.

(There is no adjustment to saving throw as the tabletop game.  The tabletop
game also does not adjust Initiative rolls for Dexterity in the case where
neither side is surprised.)

SECTION 7.5.5 - Statistic: Constitution
---------------------------------------

         HP/  System  Res.  S. T.
Score  Level   Shock  Odds  Bonus  Regen
    3     -2     35%   40%     0*      0
    4     -1     40%   45%     +1      0
    5     -1     45%   50%     +1      0
    6     -1     50%   55%     +1      0
    7      0     55%   60%     +2      0
    8      0     60%   65%     +2      0
    9      0     65%   70%     +2      0
   10      0     70%   75%     +2      0
   11      0     75%   80%     +3      0
   12      0     80%   85%     +3      0
   13      0     85%   90%     +3      0
   14      0     88%   92%     +4      0
   15     +1     91%   94%     +4      0
   16     +2     95%   96%     +4      0
   17     +3     97%   98%     +4      0
   18     +4     99%  100%     +5      0
   19    +5*     99%  100%     +5      0
   20    +5*     99%  100%     +5   1/60
Note: unlike other statistics and unlike other Gold Box games, the game does
not gracefully handle Constitution outside the 4...18 range, even though it can
readily be outside that range.

"HP/Level" is the adjustment to hit points upon character creation, and for
  every level advancement, if there is a die roll involved.  A penalty cannot
  decrease hit points gained below 1; anyone not a warrior should not get more
  than a +2 bonus (and this game doesn't recognize paladins or rangers here).
  The game doesn't properly handle hit point bonuses outside of Constitution
  3...18:
  * 19...20: this bonus for a warrior isn't implemented; it's still only +4.
  * 22: the bonus is +7 for a warrior, +5 for everyone else.
  * Other scores above 20 usually cause wild fluctuations.
  * 1...2: there is no penalty or bonus.
  * 0: the bonus is +8 for any class.
"System Shock" is the percent chance of surviving any change in form.  In the
  Gold Box games, this only applies to surviving the Stone to Flesh spell,
  and not in Pool of Radiance; it is only implemented in Secret of the Silver
  Blades or later.  (It doesn't apply to any form of unnatural aging, as it
  does in tabletop rules.)
"Res. Odds" is the percent chance that a Raise Dead or Resurrection spell will
  actually work.  If this fails, the character is forever dead.  This is *not*
  actually implemented in Pool of Radiance, even though the manual says it
  should happen; that was only implemented in Secret of the Silver Blades.
"S. T. Bonus" is the saving throw bonus that a dwarf, gnome, or halfling
  receives against rod/staff/wand or spells.  It also applies to a dwarf or
  halfling saving against poison, plus also paralyzation/death as those share
  the same base roll (which is a bug).  If Constitution is not 4...20, this
  will usually be 0 (whatever is in an uninitialized stack variable).
"Regen" permits a character with very high Constitution to restore hit points
  much faster than normal, 1 hit point per hour for each point of Constitution
  above 19.  The game does gracefully handle Constitution above 20 in this
  specific case.  (In the tabletop game, Constitution 21+ instead reduces the
  time to regenerate 1 hit point by 10 minutes per extra point of Constitution
  above 20.)

There doesn't appear to be any severe penalty for having Constitution 0 in this
game; you don't permanently drop dead from low Constitution, as often happens
in other classic CRPGs.  It will definitely cause unwanted effects if you
transfer such a character to later games, however.

There is no limit to the number of times you may cast Raise Dead or
Resurrection on a character; in tabletop rules the limit is once per original
Constitution point.

(The Constitution 19+ saving throw for races that do not get them below 19 is
not implemented; that rule only appears in DD.)

SECTION 7.5.6 - Statistic: Charisma
-----------------------------------

This gets checked in interactions with NPCs, using your spokesperson's
(current character) Charisma:

         Reaction
Score  Adjustment
    3           0   In the tabletop rules, this is expressed as a percentage
    4           5   equal to the number from this table minus 25.
    5          10
    6          15   Charisma over 18 can be achieved with the Friends spell,
    7          20   but anything better than 18 has no helpful effect.  (If
 8-12          25   Pool of Radiance were to use DD, every point above 18 would
   13          30   add another 5%.  Charisma over 18 also does have an effect
   14          35   in all Gold Box games it is checked for aside from Pool
   15          40   of Radiance.)
   16          50
   17          55
18-25          60

Loyalty is never checked for, and henchmen don't exist, as those tabletop game
effects aren't implemented.

There are no Charisma checks in Curse of the Azure Bonds; there are in both
Secret of the Silver Blades and Pools of Darkness, but the above table is not
used.

(Charisma not within 3...25 causes the reaction adjustment to be an
uninitialized stack variable, most likely 0.)

SECTION 7.6.1 - Race: Human
---------------------------

Humans have a Strength range of 3...18(00) if male, and 3...18(50) if female.
All other statistics have a beginning range of 3...18.

Only humans are capable of dual-classing, which is not implemented in Pool of
Radiance, but is in all its sequels.  They are the only player race not capable
of multi-classing.  (This all predates the D&D 3E system, where everyone can
multi-class and dual-classing is done away with.)

Humans have no racial level limits in any class and may choose any available
class.

Humans are also the strongest of the races in this game; even the unimplemented
half-orcs cannot exceed 18/99 Strength in tabletop 1E.  (This sounds a little
unusual to contemporary ears, but early editions of D&D more or less take this
straight from Tolkien.)

Since humans have no level limits in any class, if you play the later Gold Box
games they should eventually should become the majority of your party by about
halfway through Secret of the Silver Blades at the latest (and earlier if you
follow my suggestions).

SECTION 7.6.2 - Race: Dwarf
---------------------------

Dwarves have a Strength range of 8...18(99) if male, and 8...17 if female.
Other statistics begin at: Intelligence 3...18; Wisdom 3...18; Dexterity
3...17; Constitution 12...19; Charisma 3...16.

Dwarves get +1 to Constitution and -1 to Charisma on their original rolls.

A dwarf may be a fighter, thief, or a multi-class fighter/thief.  (Only a NPC
dwarf may be a cleric.)

Dwarves have a maximum fighter level of 9.

A dwarf gets a bonus to saving throws against rod/staff/wand, spells, and
poison, equal to +1 per 3.5 points of Constitution, rounded down.

A dwarf gets a +1 bonus to hit when melee attacking a half-orc, goblin,
hobgoblin, or orc.  This does not work properly against GOBLIN GUARD (#2),
HOBGOBLIN LDR (#7), or GRISHNAK (#28).

A dwarf gets a -4 bonus to Armor Class when being melee attacked by an ogre,
troll, ogre mage, giant, or titan.

A dwarf thief gets a +10% bonus to Open Lock rolls, a +15% bonus to Find/Remove
Traps rolls, a -10% penalty to Climb Walls rolls, and a -5% penalty to Read
Languages rolls.  The positive modifiers are offset by the inability of a dwarf
to start with more than Dexterity 17.

Dwarves can sometimes determine things about mines, stonework, and anything
underground on an ad hoc basis.  (This often has defined probabilities in the
tabletop game.)

(A dwarf in the tabletop game also has infravision with 60-foot range and
additional languages.  Adult dwarf women do grow beards, but usually keep them
shaved in Forgotten Realms 1E.  It's also implied in the base rulebooks that a
dwarf woman shaving her beard is kind of like wearing a short skirt in real
life.  Ed Greenwood is involved, what did you expect?)

SECTION 7.6.3 - Race: Elf
-------------------------

Elves have a Strength range of 3...18(75) if male, and 3...16 if female.  Other
statistics begin at: Intelligence 8...18; Wisdom 3...18; Dexterity 7...19;
Constitution 6...18; Charisma 8...18.

Elves get +1 to Dexterity and -1 to Constitution on their original rolls.  The
latter does not stop you from modifying their Constitution to 18.

An elf may be a fighter, magic-user, or thief, and may also multi-class in any
combination of those three classes.  (Only a NPC elf may be a cleric.)

Elves have a maximum fighter level of 7, and a maximum magic-user level of 11.

An elf has 90% magic resistance against sleep and charm spells.  Like a regular
magic resistance roll, even if this fails, the elf is still entitled to a
saving throw.  Elves are also immune to the paralysis attack of ghouls.  On the
other hand, the Raise Dead spell is not supposed work on them either (though it
does in Pool of Radiance).

An elf gets a +1 bonus to hit when attacking with either a short or long sword,
or with any bow (but not a Fine Composite Long Bow, which is a bug).

A multi-classed elf is permitted to cast magic-user spells in any armor.

An elf thief has a +5% bonus to Pick Pocket, Move Silently, and Hear Noise
rolls; a +10% bonus to Hide in Shadows rolls; and a -5% penalty to Open Lock
rolls.  (These bonuses are actually better than they appear, because an elf can
start with Dexterity 19.)

An elf has the ability to readily detect secret doors on an ad hoc basis.  This
often uses the defined probabilities from the tabletop game: 1 in 3 if actively
searching, 1 in 6 even if not.

An elf in the tabletop game also has infravision with 60-foot range, additional
languages, and the ability to surprise enemies if lightly armored.

SECTION 7.6.4 - Race: Gnome
---------------------------

Gnomes have a Strength range of 6...18(50) if male, and 6...15 if female.
Other statistics begin at: Intelligence 7...18; Wisdom 3...18; Dexterity
3...18; Constitution 8...18; Charisma 3...18.

A gnome may be a fighter, thief, or a multi-class fighter/thief.  (A NPC gnome
is allowed to be a cleric.  A gnome in the tabletop game may also be an
illusionist, a class never implemented in the Gold Box games.)

Gnomes have a maximum fighter level of 6.

A gnome gets a bonus to saving throws against rod/staff/wand and spells, equal
to +1 per 3.5 points of Constitution, rounded down.

A gnome gets a +1 bonus to hit when attacking a kobold or goblin.  This does
not work against GOBLIN GUARD (#2) as it should.

A gnome gets a +4 bonus to Armor Class when being melee attacked by a gnoll,
bugbear, ogre, troll, ogre mage, giant, or titan.

A gnome in the tabletop game also has infravision with 60-foot range,
additional languages, and the ability to determine things about mines and
underground passages.

A gnome thief gets a +5% bonus to Open Lock, Move Silently, and Hide in
Shadows rolls; a +10% bonus to Find/Remove Traps and Hear Noise rolls; and a
-15% penalty to Climb Walls rolls.

Without the ability to become an illusionist, and their low level limits,
gnomes aren't a useful race in the Gold Box adaptations.

SECTION 7.6.5 - Race: Half-Elf
------------------------------

Half-elves have a Strength range of 3...18(90) if male, and 3...17 if female.
Other statistics begin at: Intelligence 4...18; Wisdom 3...18; Dexterity
6...18; Constitution 6...18; Charisma 3...18.

A half-elf may be a cleric, fighter, magic-user, or thief; or a multi-class
cleric/fighter, cleric/magic-user, fighter/magic-user, fighter/thief,
magic-user/thief, cleric/fighter/magic-user, or fighter/magic-user/thief.  (In
later games, they may also be rangers or multi-class cleric/rangers.)

Half-elves have a maximum cleric level of 5, and maximum fighter, ranger, and
magic-user levels of 8.

A half-elf has 30% magic resistance against sleep and charm spells.  Like a
regular magic resistance roll, even if this fails, the half-elf can still get a
regular saving throw.

A multi-class half-elf is permitted to cast magic-user spells in any armor.

A half-elf gets a +5% bonus to Hide in Shadows rolls, and a +10% bonus to
Pick Pockets rolls.

A half-elf has the ability to readily detect secret doors on an ad hoc basis.
This often uses the defined probabilities from the tabletop game: 1 in 3 if
actively searching, 1 in 6 even if not.

A half-elf in the tabletop game also has infravision with 60-foot range and
additional languages.

Half-elves make good multi-classed characters in Pool of Radiance, but their
strict level limits render them rapidly obsolete even early in Curse of the
Azure Bonds.

SECTION 7.6.6 - Race: Halfling
------------------------------

Halflings have a Strength range of 6...17 if male, and 6...14 if female.  Other
statistics begin at: Intelligence 6...18; Wisdom 3...17; Dexterity 8...18;
Constitution 10...18; Charisma 3...18.

Halflings get -1 to Strength and +1 to Dexterity on their original rolls.

A halfling may be a fighter, thief, or a multi-class fighter/thief.

Halflings have a maximum fighter level of 6.

A halfling gets a bonus to saving throws against rod/staff/wand, spells, and
poison, equal to +1 per 3.5 points of Constitution, rounded down.

A halfling thief gets a +5% bonus to Pick Pockets, Open Lock, Find/Remove
Traps, and Hear Noise rolls; a +10% bonus to Move Silently rolls; a +15% bonus
to Hide in Shadows rolls; a -15% penalty to Climb Walls rolls; and a -5%
penalty to Read Languages rolls.

The enhanced thieving abilities of halflings are trivially relevant at best, so
with their low Strength and level limit in fighter, there is little reason to
create a halfling in the Gold Box games.

(A halfling in the tabletop game also has additional languages and the ability
to surprise enemies if lightly armored, and may also have infravision or the
ability to determine things about mines and underground passages.  Halflings
in the tabletop game are also divided into three sub-races that do not exist in
the Forgotten Realms.)

SECTION 7.7.1 - Class: Cleric
-----------------------------

                  - Spells by Spell Level -
Level       Exp.  1   2   3   4   5   6   7
    1          0  1   -   -   -   -   -   -
    2      1,501  2   -   -   -   -   -   -
    3      3,001  2   1   -   -   -   -   -
    4      6,001  3   2   -   -   -   -   -
    5     13,001  3   3   1   -   -   -   -
    6     27,501  3   3   2   -   -   -   - (level cap for this game)
    7     55,001  3   3   2   1   -   -   -
    8    110,001  3   3   3   2   -   -   -
    9    225,001  4   4   3   2   1   -   -
   10    450,001  4   4   3   3   2   -   -
   11    675,001  5   4   4   3   2   1   -
   12    900,001  6   5   5   3   2   2   -
   13  1,125,001  6   6   6   4   2   2   -
   14  1,350,001  6   6   6   5   3   2   -
   15  1,575,001  7   7   7   5   4   2   -
   16  1,800,001  7   7   7   6   5   3   1
   17  2,025,001  8   8   8   6   5   3   1
   18  2,250,001  8   8   8   7   6   4   1
   19  2,475,001  9   9   9   7   6   4   2 (saving throw cap)
   20  2,700,001  9   9   9   8   7   5   2
   21  2,925,001  9   9   9   9   8   6   2
   22  3,150,001  9   9   9   9   9   6   3
   23  3,375,001  9   9   9   9   9   7   3
   24  3,600,001  9   9   9   9   9   8   3
   25  3,825,001  9   9   9   9   9   8   4
   26  4,050,001  9   9   9   9   9   9   4
   27  4,275,001  9   9   9   9   9   9   5
   28  4,500,001  9   9   9   9   9   9   6
  29+ 4,725,001+  9   9   9   9   9   9   7

Only humans or half-elves may be PC clerics.  They may be of any alignment
(though the tabletop game does not permit true neutral).

Clerics gain 1d8 hit points per level until level 9, modified by Constitution,
then exactly 2 hit points per level thereafter.

After reaching 9th level, each further cleric level requires 225,000 additional
experience.

Clerics have a maximum level of 6 in Pool of Radiance and Gateway to the Savage
Frontier; 10 in Curse of the Azure Bonds and Treasures of the Savage Frontier;
15 in Secret of the Silver Blades; and 40 in Pools of Darkness.

Half-elf clerics may not exceed level 5; even when triple-classed, they will
likely hit this limit long before the end of the game.  (The Gold Box games do
not implement the UA rules where Wisdom 16 or more increases this limit.)

The prime statistic of a cleric is Wisdom.  A cleric has a minimum requirement
of Wisdom 9, though you can "M"odify a character to start with less.  Single-
classed Clerics with Wisdom 16 or higher receive a 10% bonus to experience
earned.

A cleric is only capable of wielding a club, flail, hammer, mace, or staff, but
may wear any armor or shield.  (Staff slings do not exist in this game; they do
in later Gold Box games.)

Clerics automatically are capable of learning and casting all spells of a given
spell level as soon as the minimum required experience level is reached.

Wisdom affects casting clerical spells as follows:
(1) There are bonus spells for a Wisdom of at least 13 (see Wisdom table).
    These apply only if you are able to actually cast spells of that level.
(2) A Wisdom of 17 is required to cast 6th-level spells.  A Wisdom of 18 is
    required to cast 7th-level spells.

Clerics are capable of turning undead (see that section for details).  A PC
cleric always can turn undead, even if evil.

Clerics begin with 3d6 * 10 gold (averaged if multi-classed).

A cleric in the tabletop game can also attract followers at 8th level, and may
construct a religious stronghold at 9th level.  Pool of Radiance also does not
enforce the minimum other statistics that other Gold Box games and the tabletop
game do.

SECTION 7.7.2 - Class: Fighter
------------------------------

Level      Exp.
    1         0
    2     2,001
    3     4,001
    4     8,001
    5    18,001
    6    35,001
    7    70,001 two melee attacks (every other round)
    8   125,001 (level cap for this game)
   9+  250,001+ (saving throw cap is at level 17)

A fighter may be of any race and of any alignment.

Fighter is one of the classes that counts as a "warrior".  (This is the 2E
definition, which is more consistent than 1E in this case, so I'll use that.)
The paladins, rangers, and knights of other Gold Box games are also warriors.

Fighters gain 1d10 hit points per level until level 9, modified by
Constitution, then exactly 3 hit points per level thereafter.

After reaching 9th level, each further fighter level requires 250,000
additional experience.

Fighters have a maximum level of 8 in Pool of Radiance and Gateway to the
Savage Frontier; 12 in Curse of the Azure Bonds and Treasures of the Savage
Frontier; 15 in Secret of the Silver Blades; and 40 in Pools of Darkness.

Non-human fighters have the following additional level limits:
  Dwarf: 7th if Strength 16 or less; 8th if Strength 17; 9th if Strength 18.
  Elf: 5th if Strength 16 or less; 6th if Strength 17; 7th if Strength 18.
  Gnome: 5th if Strength 17 or less; 6th if Strength 18.
  Half-Elf: 6th if Strength 16 or less; 7th if Strength 17; 8th if Strength 18.
  Halfling: 4th if Strength 16 or less; 5th if Strength 17; 6th if Strength 18.
You can achieve these scores with a Strength buff.  (UA has rules for extending
these level limits with especially high statistics, but the Gold Box games do
not use them.)

The prime statistic of a fighter is Strength.  A fighter has a minimum
requirement of Strength 9, though you can "M"odify a character to start with
less.  Single-classed fighters with Strength 16 or higher receive a 10% bonus
to experience earned.

A fighter may wield any weapon and wear any armor or shield.

A fighter may get two melee attacks per round at higher levels: every other
combat round starting at 7th level, and all rounds starting at 13th level.

Fighters of at least level 2 of a PC race may also attack multiple adjacent
weak enemies (those with 0 hit dice) in a single round, up to one weak enemy
per level.

Fighters begin with 5d4 * 10 gold (averaged if multi-classed).

A fighter in the tabletop game may build a stronghold and attract followers
starting at 9th level.  Pool of Radiance also does not enforce the minimum
other statistics that other Gold Box games and the tabletop game do.

SECTION 7.7.3 - Class: Magic-User
---------------------------------

                  ----- Spells by Spell Level -----
Level       Exp.  1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9
    1          0  1   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -
    2      2,501  2   -   -   -   -   -   -   -   -
    3      5,001  2   1   -   -   -   -   -   -   -
    4     10,001  3   2   -   -   -   -   -   -   -
    5     22,501  4   2   1   -   -   -   -   -   -
    6     40,001  4   2   2   -   -   -   -   -   - (level cap for this game)
    7     60,001  4   3   2   1   -   -   -   -   -
    8     90,001  4   3   3   2   -   -   -   -   -
    9    135,001  4   3   3   2   1   -   -   -   -
   10    250,001  4   4   3   2   2   -   -   -   -
   11    375,001  4   4   4   3   3   -   -   -   -
   12    750,001  4   4   4   4   4   1   -   -   -
   13  1,125,001  5   5   5   4   4   2   -   -   -
   14  1,500,001  5   5   5   4   4   2   1   -   -
   15  1,875,001  5   5   5   5   5   2   1   -   -
   16  2,250,001  5   5   5   5   5   3   2   1   -
   17  2,625,001  5   5   5   5   5   3   3   2   -
   18  3,000,001  5   5   5   5   5   3   3   2   1
   19  3,375,001  5   5   5   5   5   3   3   3   1
   20  3,750,001  5   5   5   5   5   4   3   3   2
   21  4,125,001  5   5   5   5   5   4   4   4   2 (saving throw cap)
   22  4,500,001  5   5   5   5   5   5   4   4   3
   23  4,875,001  5   5   5   5   5   5   5   5   3
   24  5,250,001  5   5   5   5   5   5   5   5   4
   25  5,625,001  5   5   5   5   5   5   5   5   5
   26  6,000,001  6   6   6   6   5   5   5   5   5
   27  6,375,001  6   6   6   6   6   6   6   5   5
   28  6,750,001  6   6   6   6   6   6   6   6   6
  29+ 7,125,001+  7   7   7   7   6   6   6   6   6

Only humans, elves, and half-elves may be magic-users, though they may be of
any alignment.  They begin the game knowing Detect Magic, Read Magic, Shield,
and Sleep.

Magic-users gain 1d4 hit points per level until level 11, modified by
Constitution, then exactly 1 hit point per level thereafter.

After reaching 11th level, each further magic-user level requires 375,000
additional experience.

Magic-users have a maximum level of 6 in Pool of Radiance and Gateway to the
Savage Frontier; 11 in Curse of the Azure Bonds and Treasure of the Savage
Frontier; 15 in Secret of the Silver Blades; and 40 in Pools of Darkness.

Non-human magic users also have the following additional level limits:
  Elf: 9th if Intelligence 16 or less; 10th if Int 17; 11th if Int 18.
  Half-Elf: 6th if Intelligence 16 or less; 7th if Int 17; 8th if Int 18.
(UA has rules for extending these level limits with especially high statistics,
but the Gold Box games do not use them.)

The prime statistic of a magic-user is Intelligence.  A magic-user has a
minimum requirement of Intelligence 9, though you can "M"odify a character to
start with less.  Single-classed magic-users with Intelligence 16 or higher
receive a 10% bonus to experience earned.

A magic-user may only wield a dagger, darts, or a staff, and cannot cast
magic-user spells in armor unless either multi-classed, or dual-classed with
9th level or higher ranger.

A magic-user does not automatically learn all spells of a given spell level,
unlike a cleric.  One spell may be chosen to be automatically learned every new
character level; additional spells may be learned by finding and scribing
magic-user spell scrolls.  Magic-users may also directly cast magic-user spells
from scrolls.

There are minimum Intelligence requirements for 5th and higher level spells:
10 Intelligence for 5th level spells, 12 for 6th, 14 for 7th, 16 for 8th, and
18 for 9th.

Magic-users begin with 2d4 * 10 gold (averaged if multi-classed).

A magic-user in the tabletop game may enchant items or scribe magic scrolls
starting at 11th level, and may construct a stronghold at 12th level.  Pool of
Radiance also does not enforce the minimum other statistics that other Gold Box
games and the tabletop game do.

Note that for the multi-classed elf and half-elf magic-users I recommend, your
Intelligence score has no effect whatsoever in this game -- it only matters
for single-classed magic-users or in the sequels.

SECTION 7.7.4 - Class: Thief
----------------------------

                                  Find/
                    Pick   Open  Remove    Move  Hide in   Hear  Climb   Read
Level       Exp.  Pocket  Locks   Traps  Silent  Shadows  Noise  Walls  Lang.
    1          0     30%    25%     20%     15%      10%    10%    85%      -
    2      1,251     35%    29%     25%     21%      15%    10%    86%      -
    3      2,501     40%    33%     30%     27%      20%    15%    87%      -
    4      5,001     45%    37%     35%     33%      25%    15%    88%    20%
    5     10,001     50%    42%     40%     40%      31%    20%    90%    25%
    6     20,001     55%    47%     45%     47%      37%    20%    92%    30%
    7     42,501     60%    52%     50%     55%      43%    25%    94%    35%
    8     70,001     65%    57%     55%     62%      49%    25%    96%    40%
    9    110,001     70%    62%     60%     70%      56%    30%    98%    45%
   10    160,001     80%    67%     65%     78%      63%    30%    99%    50%
   11    220,001     90%    72%     70%     86%      70%    35%  99.1%    55%
   12    440,001    100%    77%     75%     94%      77%    35%  99.2%    60%
   13    660,001    105%    82%     80%     99%      85%    40%  99.3%    65%
   14    880,001    110%    87%     85%     99%      93%    40%  99.4%    70%
   15  1,100,001    115%    92%     90%     99%      99%    50%  99.5%    75%
   16  1,320,001    125%    97%     95%     99%      99%    50%  99.6%    80%
  17+ 1,540,001+    125%    99%     99%     99%      99%    55%  99.7%    80%
  21+ (saving throw cap)

Any race may become a thief.  They may be of any alignment other than lawful
good or chaotic good.  (That's an accurate adaptation of the tabletop game
rules, but how does it make any kind of sense that a thief can be neutral good
but not chaotic good?)

Thieves gain 1d6 hit points per level until level 10, modified by Constitution,
then exactly 2 hit points per level thereafter.

After reaching 11th level, each further thief level requires 220,000 additional
experience.

Thieves have a maximum level of 8 in Gateway to the Savage Frontier; 9 in Pool
of Radiance; 12 in Curse of the Azure Bonds and Treasure of the Savage
Frontier; 18 in Secret of the Silver Blades; and 40 in Pools of Darkness.

Thieves do not have any racial level limits.

The prime statistic of a thief is Dexterity.  A thief has a minimum requirement
of Dexterity 9, though you can "M"odify a character to start with less.
Single-classed thieves with Dexterity 16 or higher receive a 10% bonus to
experience earned.

A thief may wield a club, dagger, dart, short bow, sling, short sword, broad
sword, or long sword, and may wear leather armor or elven chain.

Thieves who are not wearing armor other than leather or elven chain may
backstab an opponent, if wielding a club, dagger, or one-handed sword.  This
can be done by attacking an opponent opposite an ally that has attacked the
same enemy, and also having a different ally launch a second attack, without
the enemy taking action in between.  Such an attack gets a +4 bonus to hit, and
if it hits:
  * 2x damage if the thief is level 1...4
  * 3x damage if the thief is level 5...8
  * 4x damage if the thief is level 9...12
  * 5x damage if the thief is level 13 or higher.
This works differently compared to all later Gold Box games:
  * You are allowed to backstab a target that has more than one tile;
  * A backstab only works if you attack twice before the backstab.
(There is no requirement that the target be humanoid as there is in later
editions.)

Adjust thief abilities as follows (this calculation is not necessarily
performed immediately):

1. Adjust for Dexterity (see Dexterity table).
2. There is an adjustment for non-humans:

                       Find/
          Pick  Open  Remove    Move  Hide in   Hear  Climb   Read
Race    Pocket  Lock   Traps  Silent  Shadows  Noise  Walls  Lang.
Dwarf           +10%    +15%                           -10%    -5%
Elf        +5%   -5%             +5%     +10%    +5%
Gnome            +5%    +10%     +5%      +5%   +10%   -15%
Half-Elf  +10%                            +5%
Halfling   +5%   +5%     +5%    +10%     +15%    +5%   -15%    -5%

3. Wearing armor heavier than leather can weaken or eliminate entirely these
   skills.  (This is not generally checked for.  The additional rules in
   UA for the effect of armor upon thief skills do not apply.)

A thief only has a chance to unlock a generic locked door if it is
easy-to-open; they have no chance for a hard-to-open door.

Starting at 10th level, a thief may cast spells from magic-user scrolls with a
75% chance of success.

Thieves are not required to avoid shields to use their thief abilities, as they
must in the tabletop game.

Thieves begin with 2d6 * 10 gold (averaged if multi-classed).

A thief in the tabletop game understand the "Thieves' Cant", and can construct
a headquarters for a gang of thieves starting at 10th level.  The Gold Box
games round the tenths of percentage points for the Climb Walls skill
downwards.  Pool of Radiance also does not enforce the minimum other statistics
that other Gold Box games and the tabletop game do.

SECTION 7.8.1 - Calculating THAC0
---------------------------------

Here is how to calculate your THAC0, which is the official 2nd Edition rule for
accuracy in physical combat.  Note that (1) the LOWER the better; (2) in many
cases, the game will not use the value actually shown on the screen.

You may not specifically target an enemy that is currently blinked out, launch
any ranged attack against a specific enemy that you cannot see, or employ a
launcher weapon if an enemy is adjacent do you.

1. Begin with the appropriate number for your class and level from the
   following table.  Multi-classed and dual-classed characters should select
   the most favorable value.  The following table is actually a hybrid of the
   larger 1E tables and the smaller 2E table:

           ---------------------------- Level ----------------------------
Class       1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21+
Cleric     20 20 20 18 18 18 16 16 16 14 14 14 12 12 12 10 10 10  9  9  9
Warrior    20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1  1
Magic-user 20 20 20 20 20 19 19 19 19 19 17 17 17 17 17 14 14 14 14 14 12
Thief      20 20 20 20 19 19 19 19 16 16 16 16 14 14 14 14 12 12 12 12 10

   (This table varies by specific Gold Box game; most importantly, warrior
   THAC0 caps at level 17 in Pools of Darkness.  The game also internally
   converts the above to 60 minus THAC0.)
2. Subtract the magical bonus of the weapon you are attacking with.  If you are
   using a bow and arrows or crossbow and bolts, the bonuses stack.
3. If you are using a melee weapon, adjust by the Strength to-hit modifier.  If
   you are using a thrown or missile weapon, adjust any applicable Dexterity
   to-hit modifier.  (There is no Dexterity bonus for throwing darts or any
   throwable weapon that can be wielded in melee.)
4. Racial bonuses: Subtract 1 if one of the following applies:
   a. You are a dwarf attacking a goblin, half-orc, hobgoblin, or orc
   b. You are an elf attacking with a short sword, long sword, or any bow
   c. You are a gnome attacking a goblin or kobold
   All of the above are subject to bugs: a GOBLIN GUARD (#2) or HOBGOBLIN LDR
   (#7) do not count as goblins; GRISHNAK (#28) does not count as an orc; a
   Fine Composite Long Bow does not count as a bow.
5. Some combats may apply an ad hoc bonus or penalty; your characters receive a
   +2 penalty to THAC0 in the constricted tunnels of the Kobold Caves, for
   instance.
6. If attacking at a distance, add 2 for medium range and 5 for long range.
   Range is reckoned in thirds, and is subject to rounding artifacts.
7. If your opponent is invisible and you cannot see invisible, add 4.
8. If the following conditions are met:
   * You are a thief
   * You are not wearing armor other than leather armor or elven chain
   * You are wielding a club, dagger, or one-handed sword
   * You are directly attacking opposite an ally who has attacked the enemy
   * A second ally has attacked that enemy
   * The target has not since taken an action
   ... then this attack is a backstab: subtract 2.
9. Adjust for the effect of the following spells you are affected by:
   Bless (C1): -1
   Curse (C1): +1
   Cause Blindness (C3): +4
   Bestow Curse (C3): +4
   Prayer (C3): -1 for friendly effect, +1 for hostile effect, 0 for both

(The tabletop game rules adjust for specific weapons against specific Armor
Class values, but the Gold Box games do not enforce these rules, because they
neither make much sense nor do tabletop gamers typically use them.  The penalty
for firing ranged weapons into mixed melee combatants also is not enforced; the
tabletop game doesn't let you freely launch arrows through your front-line
fighters.)

SECTION 7.8.2 - Calculating Armor Class
---------------------------------------

Here is how to calculate Armor Class (AC).  Note that:
(1) the LOWER, the better;
(2) in many cases, the game will not use the value actually shown on the
    screen;
(3) unlike the tabletop game and many other classic CRPGs, improving AC
    below -10 does continue to help;
(4) these rules are more similar to 2E rules than to 1E.

1. Begin with 10 for a character you created.  Some monsters, even humans,
   start with a different base value.
2. Replace with 10 minus the base protective value of any equipped armor, if
   this is lower than the above.  If not wearing any armor, but are wearing
   Bracers of Defense, instead replace with its base protective value.
3. If the defender is wearing magical armor, subtract the bonus on the armor.
4. If the defender is wearing a Ring of Protection and is not wearing magical
   armor (Bracers of Defense are not armor), subtract the bonus of the best
   ring.
5. If the defender has a shield equipped, and is not being attacked from
   behind or coughing from a Stinking Cloud, subtract (1 + bonus on shield).
   (The tabletop game rule about a shield not applying to more than three
   enemies per round is not enforced.)
6. If under the effect of a Shield spell, it provides AC 3 if that bonus is
   better than that calculated in step 5 and the defender is not being attacked
   from behind.  This spell does not affect AC if your AC is already better.
7. If the defender is wearing a Cloak of Displacement, subtract 2.
8. If the defender is wearing a Cursed Necklace, add 5.
9. Adjust by Dexterity; skip if being attacked from behind or if coughing from
   a Stinking Cloud, even with a penalty.  (The tabletop game rule about
   Dexterity bonuses not applying to more than four enemies per round is not
   enforced.)
10. If the defender is a dwarf or gnome, subtract 4 if attacked in melee by
   certain larger enemies (see the sections on dwarves and gnomes for which
   ones).
11. If attacked from behind, add 2.
12. If blind, add 4.
13. Adjust for the effects of spells:
  * Protection from Evil/Protection from Good applicable to attacker: -2
  * Stinking Cloud (coughing): +4

SECTION 7.8.3 - Calculating Chance To Hit
-----------------------------------------

One of the following special conditions may apply to a physical attack (check
in the listed order):
1. If the defender is helpless, the attack automatically hits (and consumes all
   remaining attacks this round).
2. If the defender has magical displacement, the first attack of the combat
   automatically misses.  (Displacer Beasts are not actually displaced, even
   though they should be.)
3. (Only works with the bug fix applied) If the defender is protected by a
   Mirror Image spell, the attack has equal chances of affecting any of the
   fake defenders or the real one.  If a fake defender is hit, it is dispelled
   and the attack otherwise does no damage.

Otherwise, roll 1d20.  A roll of 1 always misses, and a roll of 20 always
hits.  For other rolls, if the rolled number is at least equal to the
attacker's modified THAC0 minus the defender's modified Armor Class, then the
attack hits; otherwise it misses.

Rolling high on an attack roll never results in a critical hit (exception: the
Vorpal Sword in a couple later games); that optional rule was only made part of
the standard rules in 3E.

(The automatic hit number required is not necessarily 20 in tabletop 1E.)

SECTION 7.8.4 - Calculating Damage
----------------------------------

If a physical attack lands, a helpless defender always is set to dying with -5
hit points.  A non-helpless defender may be immune to the attack; the game will
say that 0 damage was inflicted in this case.

Otherwise, use the following steps to calculate damage:

1. Roll dice according to attacker's weapon and the size of the defender.  A
   defender that is either Large in the tabletop game *or* has an icon that is
   2 tiles high counts as Large for this purpose.
2. Add the bonus from a magical weapon.  If you are using a bow and arrows or
   crossbow and bolts, both bonuses count (later Gold Box games beginning
   with Secret of the Silver Blades only add the ammunition bonus).
3. Adjust by Strength damage bonus if attacking with a melee weapon, or
   launching an arrow using a Fine Composite Long Bow.
4. If you are a ranger (only possible in later games) attacking with in melee,
   add 1 per ranger level if your target is giant-class.
5. If you are a thief who has just successfully landed a backstab, multiply
   by: 2 if 1st...4th level, 3 if 5th...8th level, 4 if 9th...12th level, or 5
   if 13th level or higher.
6. Some monsters halve damage taken from physical attacks; see individual
   monster entries for details.  Damage taken by the defender *can* be reduced
   to 0.

SECTION 7.9.1 - Resisting Magical Attacks
-----------------------------------------

Magic may be resisted in these ways:

* Some monsters are immune to the effect of some spells.  The most important
  case is immunity to the Sleep spell; Sleep cannot affect undead, or monsters
  with 6 or more levels or hit dice.

* Some monsters have magic resistance.  PCs very rarely have magic resistance
  before D&D 3E, with the exception of elven and half-elven magic resistance to
  charm and sleep magic.  This is a percentage roll; if the check passes, the
  magic simply does not affect the defender.

* If the magic resistance check fails or was never made, many magic spells also
  permit a saving throw, described in the next section.  If this is passed, the
  effect of the spell may be either reduced or nullified depending on the
  spell.

SECTION 7.9.2 - Magic Resistance
--------------------------------

Monsters in all D&D Gold Box games may have magic resistance expressed as a
percentage.  (Characters that you create never do.)

Magic resistance is a percentage roll to simply ignore the effect of most
combat spells cast at the monster.  (It does not allow them to bypass
protection spells on their foes.)

This is modified by the spellcaster's level; standard magic resistance assumes
the spellcaster is 11th level.  For any other level, adjust the percentage roll
by 5% per level in the appropriate direction.  (This adjustment does not
happen in 2E.)  If casting from a scroll or magical device, use the level of
the device (minimum spellcaster level plus 1 for scroll, 12 for magical
device).

Example: a 6th level magic user casts a Fireball at Tyranthraxus, who has 85%
magic resistance.  The effective magic resistance is 85 + 5 * (11 - 6) = 110%;
so the Fireball will always be resisted.

The only monster in Pool of Radiance with magic resistance is Tyranthraxus.

SECTION 7.9.3 - The Saving Throw
--------------------------------

To find base saving throws, choose the row for class and level, then the
leftmost appropriate column -- usually; exceptions exist, stated in individual
entries, and the Gold Box games have more divergences.  Multi-classed and dual-
classed characters use whichever row is most favorable.

For monsters, the general rule is: save as a fighter of a level equal to hit
dice; use a different class if applicable; divide effective level by 2 if
non-intelligent.  All monsters have saving throws explicitly defined in the
game files, so the game doesn't have to do this calculation for them as a human
DM does.  Monster equipment does not affect their saving throws.

Items always survive attacks; you never have to worry about fireballs causing
equipment to make saving throws to avoid destruction as you would in the
tabletop game and in some other CRPGs.

                  | Paralyz./ |           | Rod/   |        |
                  | Poison/   | Petrif./  | Staff/ | Breath |
CLASS      LEVELS | Death     | Polymorph | Wand   | Weapon | Spell
Cleric       1-3  |    10     |    13     |   14   |   16   |  15
             4-6  |     9     |    12     |   13   |   15   |  14
             7-9  |     7     |    10     |   11   |   13   |  12
           10-12  |     6     |     9     |   10   |   12   |  11
           13-15  |     5     |     8     |    9   |   11   |  10
           16-18  |     4     |     7     |    8   |   10   |   9
             19+  |     2     |     5     |    6   |    8   |   7
Fighter,       0  |    16     |    17     |   18   |   20   |  19
Paladin,     1-2  |    14     |    15     |   16   |   17   |  17
or Ranger    3-4  |    13     |    14     |   15   |   16   |  16
             5-6  |    11     |    12     |   13   |   13   |  14
             7-8  |    10     |    11     |   12   |   12   |  13
            9-10  |     8     |     9     |   10   |    9   |  11
           11-12  |     7     |     8     |    9   |    8   |  10
           13-14  |     5     |     6     |    7   |    5   |   8
           15-16  |     4     |     5     |    6   |    4   |   7
             17+  |     3     |     4     |    5   |    4   |   6
Magic-User   1-5  |    14     |    13     |   11   |   15   |  12
            6-10  |    13     |    11     |    9   |   13   |  10
           11-15  |    11     |     9     |    7   |   11   |   8
           16-20  |    10     |     7     |    5   |    9   |   6
             21+  |     8     |     5     |    3   |    7   |   4
Thief        1-4  |    13     |    12     |   14   |   16   |  15
             5-8  |    12     |    11     |   12   |   15   |  13
            9-12  |    11     |    10     |   10   |   14   |  11
           13-16  |    10     |     9     |    8   |   13   |   9
           17-20  |     9     |     8     |    6   |   12   |   7
             21+  |     8     |     7     |    4   |   11   |   5

Roll 1d20; a 1 is always a failure and a 20 is always a success.  (20 being
an automatic success is an optional rule in tabletop 1E.)  Apply the following
modifiers to the roll otherwise:

1. A dwarf, gnome, or halfling receives a [Constitution / 3.5, rounded down]
   bonus to saving throws versus rod/staff/wand or spell.
2. A dwarf or halfling receives a [Constitution / 3.5, rounded down] bonus to
   saving throws versus poison (and also paralyzation and death, which is a
   bug).
3. Add the bonus from the best equipped Ring of Protection.  Or rather, this
   is supposed to happen but rarely actually applies; the only one this appears
   to actually work for is the one carried by THEURGIST (#110).
4. Add 2 if wearing a randomly generated Cloak of Displacement.
5. Subtract 5 if wearing a Cursed Necklace.
6. Subtract 4 if blind.
7. Adjust the roll for the following spells affecting you:
     Protection from Evil (C1/M1/M3): +2 if attacker is evil-aligned
     Protection from Good (C1/M1/M3): +2 if attacker is good-aligned
     Resist Cold (C1): +3 if attack is cold-based
     Resist Fire (C2): +3 if attack is fire-based
     Bestow Curse (C3): -4
     Prayer (C3): +1 for friendly effect, -1 for hostile effect, 0 for both
     Shield (M1): +1

Note that the level or strength of the attacker is generally not a
consideration (as it generally is in 3E and later).

If the adjusted roll is equal to or greater than your base saving throw, the
saving throw succeeds; otherwise it fails.

The effects of the successful saving throw vary with the attack.  Hit point
damage is typically halved; any status effect is typically evaded entirely.

(There is no bonus from worn magical armor or Wisdom; those rules from the
tabletop game were not implemented here.)

SECTION 7.10 - Encumbrance and Movement
---------------------------------------

Encumbrance is the weight in coins you are currently carrying.  You may carry
up to what is listed in the Statistic: Strength table without penalty, which
permits a base movement rate of 12.  (Equipping a Bag of Holding allows you to
carry extra weight.)

If you carry extra weight beyond that, you take the following movement
penalties:

             Base
Extra Coins  Move
      1-256     9  There is a bug that will sometimes allow you to pick up a
    257-512     6    a few extra coins above the limit of 988 extra coins.
    513-988     3  (988 = 1500 - 512)

Your actual base movement is the greater of the above and whatever your body
armor allows.  (This is modified by haste and slow magical effects, and
specific maps or combats may have ad hoc movement modifiers.)

Movement also affects ability to flee:
* On the battlefield, fleeing is automatically successful if no enemies are in
  line of sight.  If there are, the movement of all enemies is checked, line of
  sight to individual enemies is not checked; the chance of escape is 100% if
  faster than any enemy, 50% in the case of a tie, and 0% if any enemy has more
  movement.
* In the Encounter Menu, your party's chance to "F"lee may be determined by
  comparing the movement of your slowest party member to a movement constant
  defined for each monster.  This constant is often but not necessarily its
  actual combat movement.  If your slowest party member is at least the
  movement constant, fleeing succeeds; there is no 50% roll as there is in
  combat.

Encumbrance does not affect your combat ability other than by restricting
movement (such other restrictions do happen in D&D 5E, and in multiple other
CRPGs).

There is a maximum of 16 item slots per character.

SECTION 7.11.1 - Combat Arena
-----------------------------

The combat arena measures 25 rows by 50 columns (1250 squares total).  The
combat UI displays a 7 by 7 subset of this.

The game engine supports a maximum of 72 combatants, equal to 8 characters plus
64 monsters.  However, the game scripts never have more than 56 monsters attack
the party.

Opponents are placed in front of the party; they never spawn to the sides or
from behind as they can in later MCGA Gold Box games.  If there is no room to
place a requested opponent, it simply doesn't appear at all.

Occasionally, an opponent will spawn on the other side of a barrier where it
cannot be reached; this is very rare in my experience.

The number of rounds is tracked, but as the counter is a unsigned 8-bit
integer, bugs may occur starting in round 257 (anything that only happens
during the "first" round can re-occur).

SECTION 7.11.2 - Surprise
-------------------------

A combat may begin with one or both sides surprised.

Under standard conditions (many random combats and some fixed ones), each side
rolls 1d6, and surprises the other side with a roll of 1 or 2.  These rolls
may receive ad hoc modifiers.

If one side is surprised and the other is not, and a combat ensues, the
surprised side loses 6 points of Initiative; a Dexterity bonus is required for
any chance of action during the surprise round.  Both sides surprised is, to
the combat engine, exactly the same as neither side being surprised (it isn't
the same to the scripting engine).  This is all a simplification of the
tabletop game rules.

Everyone on the surprising side may act normally in the first round, including
spellcasting (not necessarily permitted in other games).  Surprised defenders
have normal defensive abilities, but might not have all their equipment
readied, and can't take actions if their modified Initiative is 0.

If surprise occurs, surprise is somehow maintained even if you parley before
combat.  (Talking was a free action before the phrase was invented!)  Parleying
with surprised monsters is more likely to have a peaceful outcome, and even
simply waiting is likely to cause the monsters to get away.  Monsters that
surprise you may immediately attack before you have a chance to talk with them.

(Thieves, elves, and halflings can get bonuses to surprising foes in the
tabletop game, but those rules do not exist in the Gold Box games.)

SECTION 7.11.3 - Initiative
--------------------------

Each individual PC or monster rolls 1d6 for base initiative.  This is modified
by Dexterity (always; minimum 1 after this step), and 6 is subtracted if a
surprise penalty applies on the first round of combat (minimum 0).  Creatures
then take turns from highest to lowest, with any creature with initiative 0
unable to act.  Ties are broken by rolling 1d100, higher roll goes first.

(Initiative is not affected by Haste and Slow as it should by tabletop rules.
Initiative is also normally rolled for whole sides, not individuals, though
that is more to save time rolling physical dice.  Initiative is always affected
by Dexterity; in tabletop 1E/2E it does not affect initiative in any round
where surprise does not apply.  In 2E, 1d10 is rolled instead of 1d6.  For
comparison: the original Might and Magic rolls 1d13 (-6 to +6) for the entire
party relative to the monsters; Wizardry uses 1d10 rolled for individuals,
despite significantly predating D&D 2E.)

Any creature whose turn it is may expend all movement and physical attacks
before anyone else gets a chance to do anything at all.  The only exception is
attacks of opportunity, which can occur if you either move away from an
adjacent enemy, or you move next to an enemy that chose the "G"uard command.
(The tabletop game doesn't typically let you move and attack like that; the
weapon speed modifiers that the tabletop game has are also not enforced.)

You can also freely go into your inventory and equip or unequip anything you
are carrying -- even body armor.

You may issue a command to "D"elay your move to the end of the current round
(which works by setting initiative to 1).  This is useful for things like
landing backstabs, or waiting your enemies to get closer, while not actually
losing an action.

Spellcasting is the only action that is not necessarily instantaneous.  Spells
require a number of segments equal to its tabletop spellcasting time divided by
3, rounded down; this cannot set the target segment below 1.  If the
spellcaster takes even 1 point of damage during this time, concentration is
disrupted and the spell is lost.  (There are no Concentration skill checks
until D&D 3E.)

SECTION 7.12 - Turning Undead
-----------------------------

Clerics, and paladins in later games, have the magical power to turn undead
once per combat.  All clerics turn undead and not command them (as evil clerics
do in the tabletop game).

The turning character must have line of sight to the undead to be turned.

Find the turning number from the below table.  If there is more than one type
of undead, turning affects undead from weakest to strongest.  Turnable undead
not listed below have the necessary row listed in their Detailed Bestiary
entry.  (The breaks in patterns in the table are deliberate, and even explained
at length in the D&D 1E DMG.  The 2E table removes these irregularities and
makes the table regular.)

             Level of Turning Cleric (Subtract 2 for Paladins)
Undead type     1    2    3    4    5    6    7    8 9-13  14+
Skeleton       10    7    4    T    T    D    D   D*   D*   D*
Zombie         13   10    7    T    T    D    D    D   D*   D*
Ghoul          16   13   10    4    T    T    D    D    D   D*
Shadow         19   16   13    7    4    T    T    D    D   D*
Wight          20   19   16   10    7    4    T    T    D    D
Ghast               20   19   13   10    7    4    T    T    D
Wraith                   20   16   13   10    7    4    T    D
Mummy                         20   16   13   10    7    4    T
Spectre                            20   16   13   10    7    T
Vampire                                 20   16   13   10    4
Ghost                                        20   16   13    7
Lich                                              19   16   10
Special                                           20   19   13

If there is no entry, that undead cannot be turned.  (For this game, the
internal table doesn't extend below Vampire.)

Roll 1d20.  (In later games, special modifiers may apply to individual maps if
turning is especially easy or difficult.)  If the roll is at least equal to the
number in the table, 1d12 undead are turned.  For mixed groups of undead, the
same roll is used against all undead.

"T" indicates automatic turning.  "D" means that the undead is outright
destroyed, not turned.  "D*" means to replace the 1d12 undead affected with
6+1d6.

Undead that are turned but not destroyed attempt to flee from the party (as if
affected by fear), meaning you will have to chase them down if you want to
destroy them.  Since the fleeing undead can get stuck in corners and may
require a lot of tedious chasing down, in later games turned undead simply
vanish into thin air (and give no experience).

Enemy clerics are capable of turning any Animated characters you have.

SECTION 7.13 - Morale
---------------------

Morale represents the willingness of a creature to face the dangers of combat.
Your own characters never have to make morale checks, but all monsters and NPCs
do.

Each monster encounter or NPC has a base morale rating, from 0 to 100.  Once
hostile monsters lose that percentage of their starting total hit points
(this calculation is only performed between rounds), they will fail their
morale check.  Non-PC allies fail once they lose that percentage of their own
starting hit points.  Hostile monsters do not check morale individually as in
the tabletop game; there is no randomness here unlike the tabletop game.

Morale may be modified with the Bless (+5) or Curse (-5) spells, or set to 100
if charmed.

Anyone failing a morale check decides what to do based on its mobility, and may
either flee in panic, where they will try to run at full speed away from
combat, or outright surrender.  Monsters may only surrender with Intelligence 6
or more and if they are hostile to the party.  You do not receive experience or
items for monsters who have successfully run away, but you do from any monster
that has surrendered.

In some cases, a monster encounter morale rating isn't defined.  If this
happens, what gets used is whatever the last monster encounter morale rating
was.

(The general rules for the tabletop game are not used; monsters do not make
fighting retreats or orderly retreats, for instance.)

SECTION 7.14 - Party Strength
-----------------------------

Party Strength is a calculation the game performs to scale random combats to
your party, among other things.

A character's contribution to Party Strength is the sum of:
  * 0.4 * cleric level
  * 0.8 * magic-user level
  * 0.5 * each point of AC below 0 (0 if AC is 0 or above)
  * 0.5 * each point of THAC0 below 21 (0 if THAC0 is 21 or above)
  * 0.1 * current hit points
rounded down to the nearest integer.  The values used for AC and THAC0 are the
ones shown on your character screen.

Party Strength is the above for every character summed.  It will start at about
15 for an equipped level 1 party; a strong endgame party may be above 120.

Since armor taking you below AC 0 and weapons affect this calculation, you can
sometimes micromanage it by keeping such items unequipped until needed.  (This
only makes any real difference in Valhingen Graveyard.)


SECTION 8.1 - Notes on Spells
-----------------------------

Clerical spells are automatically added to the spellbooks of those eligible to
cast them.  Magic-user spells cast by magic-users are not automatically
learned; you can add one spell to your spellbook every time you gain a magic-
user level, or scribe them from magic-user scrolls that you find.

All spells must be memorized while "E"ncamped before they can be cast.
Memorizing or scribing spells takes 15 minutes for each spell level, plus a
base preparation time dependent on the highest level spell you are memorizing
or scribing:

  Spell Level  Time
  1-2          4 hours
  3-4          6 hours
  5-6          8 hours
  7-8          10 hours
  9            12 hours

By tabletop game standards, all spells effectively always have a verbal
component, and never have somatic or material components:
* magical silence always prevents spellcasting;
* there is no way to only have your arms bound so that you cannot cast spells
  with somatic components;
* no spellcasting materials like diamond dust are ever required.

Casting baneful versions of clerical spells does not have the alignment
implications or restrictions that it does in the tabletop game.

Some spells depend on the hit dice of the target.  This is always a simple
integer in the Gold Box games, unlike in the tabletop game; every 4 fractional
hit dice are generally converted to a single whole hit die.  For characters,
this is equal to level, or highest level for multi-classed characters; hit dice
do not max out at level 9...11 as they do in the tabletop game.

If a diameter of effect is specified, the exact area affected is:

  Diameter 3    Diameter 5     Diameter 7   An intervening wall or other hard
                                            barrier will block the effect.
                                   ***
                    ***           *****     If a buff with a diameter is cast
      ***          *****         *******    outside of combat, by default it
      *X*          **X**         ***X***    affects everyone in the party.
      ***          *****         *******
                    ***           *****
                                   ***

Casting times listed below are given in initiative segments, in tabletop rule
units, if they are castable in combat.  Casting spells outside combat never
takes time, unlike the tabletop game.  Some spells cast faster than the
tabletop version; these are marked with asterisks.

The number of segments actually taken is one third of that listed, rounded
down.  So a 1-segment or 2-segment spell casts instantly; one taking 3 to 5
segments is only delayed by 1 segment; etc.  This is also capped so any spell
will take effect no later than the last initiative segment.  This makes combat
spellcasting significantly more powerful than in the tabletop game; it also
makes consumable magic items less useful, as one of their main benefits is
their speed.

AI priority is how much the AI likes to cast the spell, with higher numbers
indicating higher likelihood.  The AI will always attempt to cast a spell with
priority 7 if it comes up for consideration and if it can find a target; the AI
will never attempt to cast a spell with priority 0.

A buff or debuff does not stack with itself; you cannot make a buff last twice
as long by casting it twice in succession.

SECTION 8.2.1 - 1st Level Cleric Spells
---------------------------------------

Clerics may memorize and cast the following spells (paladins in later games
may learn these starting at level 9):

Bless (Range: 6, Area: diameter 5, Duration: 6 minutes, Casting Time: 10, AI
  Priority: 2) -- Targets only allies who are not adjacent to enemies; provides
  a +1 bonus to hit and a +5 bonus to morale.

Curse (Range: 6, Area: diameter 5, Duration: 6 minutes, Casting Time: 10, AI
  Priority: 3) -- Targets only enemies, even those adjacent to allies.
  Inflicts a -1 penalty to hit and a -5 penalty to morale (no saving throw).

  (Curse targeting rules change in later Gold Box games.)

Cure Light Wounds (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Casting Time: 5, AI Priority: 1)
  -- Restores 1d8 hit points to a creature.  This will not actually restore
  consciousness to unconscious characters until after combat.

  (In the tabletop game, this is not supposed to have any effect on undead or
  incorporeal creatures.  Pool of Radiance also predates the D&D 3E and modern
  CRPG effect of cure spells inflicting damage on undead.)

Cause Light Wounds (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Casting Time: 5, AI Priority: 2)
  -- If a successful melee combat attack roll is made, inflicts 1d8 damage upon
  creatures affected by Cure Light Wounds (no saving throw).

Detect Magic (Range: caster, Duration: 10 minutes, Casting Time: 1*, AI
  Priority: 0) -- All magical items are indicated with an asterisk.  An item
  is "magical" if it has a positive magical bonus, a positive saving throw
  bonus, or is cursed.

Protection from Evil (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 3 minutes/level,
  Casting Time: 4, AI Priority: 1) -- Target receives a -2 bonus to Armor Class
  and to all saving throws if attacked by any creature of an evil alignment.

  (This does not have the tabletop game effect of preventing bodily contact by
  conjured or summoned creatures.)

Protection from Good (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 3 minutes/level,
  Casting Time: 4, AI Priority: 2) -- As Protection from Evil, but protects
  against creatures of good alignment.

Resist Cold (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 10 minutes/level, Casting
  Time: 10, AI Priority: 0) -- Target receives a +3 bonus to all saving throws
  against all cold attacks.  All cold damage taken is halved.  (Or it would, if
  there were any kind of cold attack anywhere in this game.)

SECTION 8.2.2 - 2nd Level Cleric Spells
---------------------------------------

Clerics of at least level 3 may memorize and cast the following spells
(paladins in later games may learn these starting at level 11):

Find Traps (Range: caster, Duration: 30 minutes, Non-combat only) -- Detects
  traps on an ad hoc basis.

Hold Person (Range: 6, Area: 1...3 targets, Duration: 4 minutes + 1 minute/
  level, Casting Time: 5, AI Priority: 7) -- Holds immobile up to 3 Medium-
  sized or smaller living humanoid targets.  A saving throw vs. spell (it
  should be vs. paralyzation) will negate the spell; it is at a -1 penalty if 2
  creatures are targeted and at a -2 penalty if 1 creature is targeted.

  A creature is, for the purpose of this spell:
  * Medium-sized or smaller if its icon is 1x1; the separate Large flag is not
    checked
  * humanoid if it is type 0 (humanoid) or 1 (monstrous humanoid).  In the
    Bestiary, "Monster" may be affected, but "Generic Monster" may not.

  (This spell got nerfed in 2E, which requires all targets to be close to each
  other.  It got nerfed hard in 3E, which only allows one target; and targets
  also get additional saving throws to break free every round; *and* high
  Wisdom now grants a bonus to the saving throw.  And in 5E, it also requires
  the caster to concentrate to maintain the spell.  It's still a strong spell
  in 5E!  All this may or may not have anything to do with the infamous
  usefulness of this spell in the Gold Box games.)

Resist Fire (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 10 minutes/level, Casting
  Time: 5, AI Priority: 2) -- Target receives a +3 bonus to all saving throws
  against all fire attacks.  All fire damage taken is halved.

Silence, 15' Radius (Range: 12, Area: 1 target, Duration: 2 minutes/level,
  Casting Time: 5, AI Priority: 4) -- Causes magical silence on the target,
  which moves with the targeted creature and causes silence in adjacent
  squares.  A saving throw can negate the spell.  A creature is silenced in a
  round if in a silenced area at any time in that round.

  The AI will not use items if silenced; manually controlled characters are not
  under this restriction.

  (This must specifically take effect upon a creature, unlike in the tabletop
  game.  The silence effect also does not stay with you for the rest of the
  round.)

Slow Poison (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 1 hour/level, Casting Time:
  1, AI Priority: 0) -- Target ally killed by poison will be revived (though
  with but 1 hit point to start) for the duration of the spell, even in the
  thick of combat.  The revived character will take 1 point of damage every 10
  minutes, though hit points will not drop below 1 from this damage.  If the
  target does not receive a Neutralize Poison spell by the end of this spell's
  duration, full-blown death results.

  (This does not have the tabletop game requirement of being cast within 1 turn
  per caster level of the target's death.)

Snake Charm (Range: 3, Area: All, Duration: 4+1d4 minutes, Casting Time: 5, AI
  Priority: 0) -- Charms snakes and snake-like creatures; may affect any number
  of snakes, so long as thir current hit point sum does not exceed the caster's
  current hit points (no saving throw).  There is no limit on area affected.
  Dragons are not sufficiently ophidian to count as snake-like, but scorpions
  somehow do count as snakes.

  (Targeting does match what the PHB says -- it likewise doesn't set any kind
  of maximum on area affected.)

Spiritual Hammer (Range: caster, Duration: 1 minute/level, Casting Time: 5, AI
  Priority: 1) -- Summons a temporary magical hammer, which has a +1 magical
  bonus.  This hammer can be thrown; it will magically reappear in the caster's
  hands in that case.

  (The magical bonus in the tabletop bonus does not apply to accuracy or
  damage, only to monster vulnerability.)

SECTION 8.2.3 - 3rd Level Cleric Spells
---------------------------------------

Clerics of at least level 5 may memorize and cast the following spells
(paladins in later games may learn these starting at level 13):

Animate Dead (Area: All, Casting Time: 10, AI Priority: 2) -- Raises a fallen
  enemy or enemies (if cast in combat; maximum number of targets affected is
  the caster's level) or a single dead PC (if cast outside of combat) as undead
  who act as an allied NPCs (who cannot cast spells).  Any target must be a
  humanoid that isn't a monstrous humanoid (if the bestiary says it is a
  "Monster" that is OK; "Generic Monster" or "Monstrous Humanoid" are not).

  Animated creatures are vulnerable to being turned as zombies by enemy clerics
  (regardless of HD), have base movement 6, lose all memorized spells, and are
  always controlled by the AI.  If reduced to 0 HP, they die; if level-drained,
  they are permanently killed.

  Animated enemies do not stay with you beyond the end of combat, contrary to
  the documentation, but an animated PC remains so until either reduced to zero
  hit points or raised from the dead.

  (Unlike the tabletop game, targets are animated with full hit dice and hit
  points, and the range limit of 10 feet does not exist here.  Also, you should
  have fun with this spell now, since it does not exist in any other Gold Box
  game.  It's sometimes said that was a PR move, but have you seen just how
  much code there is to handle Animate Dead?  I'd throw it away in favor of
  other features and fewer bugs.)

Cure Blindness (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Casting Time: 10, AI Priority: 0) --
  Cures all forms of blindness.

Cause Blindness (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: indefinite, Casting Time:
  10, AI Priority: 3) -- If a successful melee combat attack roll is made,
  and the target fails a saving throw, blinds the target.  A blinded creature
  gets a -4 penalty to all of attack rolls, Armor Class, and saving throws
  until cured.

Cure Disease (Area: 1 target, Non-combat only) -- Cures all disease, which
  includes both regular disease and mummy rot.  This does not remove
  cumulative damage the disease may have inflicted.

  (This works instantly; it doesn't take 10 minutes to several days as the
  tabletop version.)

Cause Disease (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: indefinite, Casting Time:
  100, AI Priority: 4) -- If a successful melee combat attack roll is made,
  and the target fails a saving throw, causes disease in the target lasting for
  1d6 * 10 minutes.  Disease drains Strength (1 per hour, permanently; minimum
  3) and hit points (1 per 10 minutes; minimum 1) over time.

  (By tabletop rules 1d6 * 10 should be the time of onset, not how long the
  disease lasts.  The casting time of 100 is not a mistake; that's more or less
  what the PHB says, but the game engine doesn't properly support spells with a
  casting time that long.)

Dispel Magic (Range: 6, Area: diameter 3, Casting Time: 4, AI Priority: 5) --
  Attempts to remove all magical effects, both positive and negative, from the
  target.  A Minor Globe of Invulnerability does not block this spell.  The
  base chance per effect is 50%.  If the caster is higher level than the caster
  of the effect, add 5% per level; if lower level, subtract 2% per level.  If
  cast outside of combat, affects only the chosen character and not the entire
  party.

  Any dispellable effect that does not remember its caster level will instead
  use the lower 4 bits of the effect strength field as caster level.  This
  happens for:
  * any temporary Strength-increasing effect
  * Friends
  * Mirror Image
  * STIRGE (#61) blood drain

  (In the tabletop game, this is supposed to be automatic against the caster's
  own magic, but the Gold Box games do not keep track of who was responsible
  for most effects.  This also has no effect on magical items in any way.  The
  tabletop rules also state a casting time of 6.)

Prayer (Range: caster, Area: All, Duration: 1 minute/level, Casting Time: 6, AI
  Priority: 5) -- Provides a +1 bonus to hit and to saving throws to all
  allies and a -1 penalty to hit and to saving throws to all enemies, so long
  as they are within 6 squares of the caster (no saving throw).

  (Bonuses and penalties apply a maximum of once each.)

Remove Curse (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Casting Time: 6, AI Priority: 0) --
  Enables target to unequip cursed items, and dispels the Bestow Curse debuff.

Bestow Curse (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 10 minutes/level, Casting
  Time: 6, AI Priority: 4) -- If a successful melee combat attack roll is made
  and the target fails a saving throw, inflicts a -4 penalty both to attack
  rolls and to all saving throws.

SECTION 8.2.4 - 7th Level Cleric Spells
---------------------------------------

This may only be cast from a scroll.

Restoration (Area: 1 target, Non-combat only) -- Restores 1 level to target; if
  more than one level was lost, the level requiring the lowest experience is
  restored first.  The experience regained is the minimum required to reach
  that level.  Hit points regained is equal to hit points drained divided by
  levels gained.  (This may not restore the correct number; HP drain is equal
  to pre-drain max HP divided by total levels, and rounding artifacts may
  occur.)  No effect if target has 0 lost levels; does not work properly on
  NPCs.

  (This does not have the tabletop game requirement of being cast within 1 day
  per caster level of the draining attack.)

SECTION 8.3.1 - 1st Level Magic-user Spells
-------------------------------------------

Magic-users may learn, memorize, and cast the following spells (rangers in
later games may learn these spells starting at level 9):

Burning Hands (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Casting Time: 1, AI Priority: 4) --
  Inflicts 1 point of fire damage per level (no saving throw).

  (The tabletop version affects a 3 square arc.)

Charm Person (Range: 12, Area: 1 target, Duration: indefinite, Casting Time: 1,
  AI Priority: 6) -- Charms one Medium-sized or smaller living humanoid target;
  this will not work on a target that is Large in either way, and a saving
  throw negates the spell.  Monsters charmed to your side have Morale 100.  You
  can counter a Charm Person spell with your own charm spell.

  (Other damage inflicted upon the target does not apply a saving throw bonus,
  as happens in the tabletop game; the game doesn't maintain a history of who
  inflicted what damage when.)

Detect Magic (Range: caster, Duration: 2 minutes/level, Casting Time: 1, AI
  Priority: 0) -- All magical items are indicated with an asterisk.  An item
  is "magical" if it has a positive magical bonus, a positive saving throw
  bonus, or is cursed.

Enlarge (Range: 2/level, Area: 1 target, Duration: 10 minutes/level, Casting
  Time: 1, AI Priority: 0) -- Increases the Strength of the target depending on
  caster's level:
  Level 1 - Strength 18        Level 6 - Strength 18(00)
  Level 2 - Strength 18(01)    Level 7 - Strength 19
  Level 3 - Strength 18(51)    Level 8 - Strength 20
  Level 4 - Strength 18(76)    Level 9 - Strength 21
  Level 5 - Strength 18(91)    Level 10 or higher - Strength 22
  This will not lower Strength.  You can get more than Strength 18 even if not
  a warrior.

  (Both the documentation and tabletop rules say range is supposed to be
  0.5/level.  The effect is also slightly different from the tabletop rules,
  which grant Strength 17 at level 1 and Strength 18 at level 2.  If you're
  wondering where this comes from, it's in the PHB, under the Psionics power
  Expansion.)

Reduce (Range: 2/level, Area: 1 target, Duration: 10 minutes/level, Casting
  Time: 1, AI Priority: 0) -- Dispels any Enlarge spell on the target, if it
  fails a saving throw vs. spell.  Does not actually reduce the damage of the
  target otherwise, as the tabletop version does; the documentation to later
  games implies this is a deliberate feature of the computer version.

  (Both the documentation and tabletop rules say range is supposed to be
  0.5/level.)

Friends (Range: caster, Area: All, Duration: 1 minute/level, Casting Time: 1,
  AI Priority: 0) -- Raises Charisma by 2d4, with a cap of 25; increases above
  18 do not help.

  (Contrary to both the documentation and the tabletop rules, this does not
  allow a saving throw.)

Magic Missile (Range: 6+4/level, Area: 1 target, Casting Time: 1, AI Priority:
  6) -- Launches unerring missiles that do 1d4+1 damage each (no saving throw),
  with an additional missile gained at every odd-numbered level.  You must
  launch all missiles at a single target.

  (There is no damage cap as there is in later editions; the tabletop version
  also permits you to launch missiles at different targets.)

Protection from Evil (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 2 minutes/level,
  Casting Time: 1, AI Priority: 1) -- Same as the clerical spell, aside from
  duration and casting time.

Protection from Good (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 2 minutes/level,
  Casting Time: 1, AI Priority: 2) -- Same as the clerical spell, aside from
  duration and casting time.

Read Magic (Range: caster, Duration: 2 minutes/level, Non-combat only) --
  Enables identification of magical scrolls readied by the caster.  This
  will then allow the caster to learn such spells.  (Identifying the scroll in
  a shop does the same thing.)

Shield (Range: caster, Duration: 5 minutes/level, Casting Time: 1, AI Priority:
  3) -- This has multiple effects: (1) Target is undamaged by the Magic Missile
  spell; (2) If this is better than the caster's AC, grants AC 3, with no bonus
  against rear attacks; (3) +1 bonus to all saving throws.

  (This does not vary the AC between 2, 3, or 4 as the tabletop version.  It
  also does not block damage from a Wand of Magic Missiles.)

Shocking Grasp (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Casting Time: 1, AI Priority: 4) --
  If a successful melee combat attack roll is made, inflicts level+1d8
  electrical damage (no saving throw).

Sleep (Range: 3+4/level, Area: diameter 3, Duration: 5 minutes/level, Casting
  Time: 1, AI Priority: 7) -- Puts to sleep 4d4 points worth of living
  creatures (no saving throw).  Points are a function of hit dice, as follows:

  HD   Points
   0        1
   1        1
   2        2
   3        4
   4        6
   5       10 (for creatures with a race of monster; 20 otherwise)
  6+       20 (always unaffected)

  (This will never affect more than nine targets, because it is a diameter 3
  spell.  According to both the documentation and the tabletop game rules, this
  should have a range of 3+1/level.  The tabletop version doesn't work on 5 HD
  creatures; it works here because tabletop 4+4 HD is converted to 5 HD.)

SECTION 8.3.2 - 2nd Level Magic-user Spells
-------------------------------------------

Magic-users of at least level 3 may learn, memorize, and cast the following
spells (rangers in later games may learn these starting at level 13):

Detect Invisibility (Range: caster, Duration: 5 minutes/level, Casting Time: 2,
  AI Priority: 1) -- Enables caster to see creatures with invisibility.

Invisibility (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: indefinite, Casting Time: 2,
  AI Priority: 2) -- Target is granted invisibility.  Invisibility is lost if
  the target attacks or casts any spell.  You cannot launch a ranged attack
  against a creature you cannot see, nor can you make an attack of
  opportunity against it if it moves away from you; even permitted attacks
  receive a -4 penalty to-hit.  This effect is described in "D"isplay as
  "invisibility", which differs from "invisible".

Knock (Non-combat only) -- Attempts to open a locked or magically barred door.
  In Pool of Radiance, if you have this option and you actually have the spell
  memorized, it always works.

Mirror Image (Range: caster, Duration: 2 minutes/level, Casting Time: 2, AI
  Priority: 3) -- Creates 1d4 fake versions of the caster.  These dance about
  close to the caster, so that any attack that specifically targets the caster
  may instead target one of them instead; the caster and each of the images all
  have equal chances of being targeted.  Any fake version struck is
  automatically dispelled.

  (This is how it should work, and does starting in Secret of the Silver
  Blades, but it only works for targeted spells in Pool of Radiance unless you
  apply the patch in Code Hacking.)

Ray of Enfeeblement (Range: 1+1/level, Area: 1 target, Duration: 1 minute/
  level, Casting Time: 2, AI Priority: 2) -- Reduces melee damage done by 25%;
  a saving throw negates the spell.  This does not directly affect Strength.

  (According to both the documentation and the tabletop game rules, this should
  have a range of 1+0.25/level.  Also, the +2%/level bonus the tabletop version
  has is not present.  If you've heard this is a good spell, that's the 3E
  version, where it is 1st level and doesn't permit a saving throw.)

Stinking Cloud (Range: 3, Area: 2 by 2 square, Duration: 1 minute/level,
  Casting Time: 2, AI Priority: 7) -- Creates a 2 by 2 square cloud of choking
  gas, with its upper left corner at the targeted square.  A creature must roll
  a saving throw vs. poison if it is (1) not already affected by Stinking
  Cloud; (2) not animated; and (3) not immune to poison:
  * If the saving throw fails, the creature chokes with nausea, and is helpless
    for 1d4+1 rounds.  Immunity to paralysis does not protect against this.
  * If the saving throw succeeds, the creature is still coughing, with
    penalties applied for the rest of the current round:
    * +4 penalty to Armor Class (but no worse than AC 10);
    * loss of any modifiers for Dexterity and for any shield;
    * loss of the ability to cast spells;
    * for the AI only, loss of the ability to use items.
    The creature must save again if still in the cloud the next round.

  A vulnerable AI-controlled creature is far more reluctant to enter the cloud
  than in later games.  Unlike in later games, monsters do not need to re-save
  against this spell if this is cast on them while there is already a Stinking
  Cloud there.  The AI will not cast this spell unless it can catch at least
  one enemy in the cloud.

  (While notoriously strong in D&D 1E, this spell is less effective even in 2E.
  This also may work on undead in some non-IBM versions.)

Strength (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 1 hour/level, Non-combat only) --
  Increases Strength by 1d4 if a magic-user, 1d6 if a cleric or thief, or 1d8
  if a fighter.  For the purpose of this spell, 1 point of added Strength is
  equivalent to 10 percentage points of extraordinary Strength for a fighter.
  This cannot increase Strength above 18 for non-fighter, or above 18(00) for
  fighter.

  (There is no provision for correct behavior if the target has levels in any
  of paladin, ranger, monk, or druid.)

SECTION 8.3.3 - 3rd Level Magic-user Spells
-------------------------------------------

Magic-users of at least level 5 may learn, memorize, and cast the following
spells:

Blink (Range: caster, Duration: 1 minute/level, Casting Time: 1, Combat only,
  AI Priority: 2) -- Caster starts to blink.  A blinking creature will blink
  out after acting.  Once blinked out, the creature may not be specifically
  targeted, and can only be hit by area attacks.  While this may only be cast
  in combat, it may last into a succeeding combat.

  (Unlike the tabletop game, which randomizes the blink, this will not in any
  way hamper the blinking creature's own attacks; it's a much more powerful
  defense in the Gold Box games than in the tabletop game.  A blinking creature
  may also be attacked in melee by moving into it, which I don't think was an
  intended feature, since "A"im won't work.)

Dispel Magic (Range: 12, Area: diameter 3, Casting Time: 3, AI Priority: 2) --
  Same as the clerical spell aside from range and casting time.

Fireball (Range: 10+1/level, Area: diameter 5 outdoors, diameter 7 indoors,
  Casting Time: 3, AI Priority: 7) -- Inflicts (level)d6 fire damage to each
  creature in the area of effect; a successful saving throw halves damage
  taken.  The AI will not cast this spell unless it can catch at least three
  enemies in the blast.

  (There is no damage cap as there is in later editions.)

Haste (Range: 6, Area: diameter 5, Duration: 3 minutes + 1 minute/level,
  Casting Time: 3, AI Priority: 3) -- Cancels an existing Slow effect and
  doubles both movement and number of physical attacks; affects only allies;
  ages any affected recipients by one year.

  (This does not provide a bonus to initiative or incur a system shock check as
  the tabletop version does.)

Hold Person (Range: 12, Area: 1...4 targets, Duration: 2 minutes/level, Casting
  Time: 3, AI Priority: 6) -- Like the 2nd level cleric spell, but all of
  range, number of possible targets, duration, saving throws, and casting time
  are different.  The saving throw penalty is at a -1 penalty if 2 creatures
  are targeted, and at -3 if 1 creature is targeted.

Invisibility, 10' Radius (Range: 1, Area: diameter 3, Duration: indefinite,
  Casting Time: 3, AI Priority: 1) -- Casts Invisibility on all creatures in
  range, friend or foe.

  (Unlike the tabletop version, this invisibility is not broken even if you
  move away from the target, and even if the target itself breaks
  invisibility.)

Lightning Bolt (Range: 4+1/level, Area: 8 squares, Casting Time: 3, AI
  Priority: 7) -- The lightning bolt from by this spell inflicts (level)d6
  electrical damage to all creatures struck; a successful saving throw halves
  damage taken.  The lightning bolt starts on the targeted square, and travels
  in the same direction for 8 squares thereafter.  If the bolt hits a wall or
  other terrain feature, it will reflect back towards the caster (and not at
  the angle of incidence).  Such a reflected bolt can thus hit creatures a
  second time, or rebound all the way to the caster.

  (There is no damage cap as there is in later editions.)

Protection from Evil, 10' Radius (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 2
  minutes/level, Casting Time: 3, AI Priority: 1) -- As Protection from Evil
  but for casting time, and the protection extends to any adjacent ally.

Protection from Good, 10' Radius (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 2
  minutes/level, Casting Time: 3, AI Priority: 2) -- As Protection from Good
  but for casting time, and the protection extends to any adjacent ally.

Protection from Normal Missiles (Range: 1, Area: 1 target, Duration: 10
  minutes/level, Casting Time: 3, AI Priority: 3) -- Grants immunity to all
  nonmagical thrown weapons and nonmagical launched missiles.

  (This does not reduce the damage from magical missiles as the tabletop
  version does.)

Slow (Range: 9+1/level, Area: diameter 5, Duration: 3 minutes + 1 minute/level,
  Casting Time: 3, AI Priority: 5) -- Cancels an existing Haste spell and
  halves both movement and number of physical attacks (no saving throw).  This
  affects only enemies, up to a maximum of 1 target/level.

  (This does not penalize initiative by 2, affect allies, or stack cumulatively
  with itself, as the tabletop version does.)

SECTION 8.4 - Spell Summary
---------------------------

Many details (especially the effect of a successful saving throw) are elided
to fit this neatly into a table.

Duration (Dur.) is in minutes.
Casting time (CT) is in segments (and divided by 3 in Gold Box games).
"AI Pr" = AI priority; "s.t." = saving throw

Clerical                                     AI
Spell Name            Range  Area   Dur.  CT Pr Effect
-----------------     ----- ----- ------  -- -- -------------------------------
Bless                     6 dia 5      6  10  2 +1 to-hit; +5 morale
Curse                     6 dia 5      6  10  3 -1 to-hit; -5 morale
Cure Light Wounds         1 1 tar      -   5  1 cure 1d8
Cause Light Wounds        1 1 tar      -   5  2 dam 1d8
Detect Magic           self     -     10   1  0 highlight magical
Protection from Evil      1 1 tar    3/L   4  1 +2 bonus to AC/s.t.
Protection from Good      1 1 tar    3/L   4  2 +2 bonus to AC/s.t.
Resist Cold               1 1 tar   10/L  10  0 half cold dam, +3 s.t.

Find Traps             self     -     30  NC  - ad hoc trap detect
Hold Person               6 3 tar  4+1/L   5  7 paralyze humanoids, null w/save
Resist Fire               1 1 tar 10+3/L   5  2 half fire dam, +3 s.t.
Silence, 15' Radius      12 1 tar    2/L   5  4 prevents spellcasting
Slow Poison               1 1 tar   60/L   1  0 temp. poison revival
Snake Charm               3 level    1/L   5  1 charm snakes
Spiritual Hammer       self     -    1/L   5  1 temp. hammer +1

Animate Dead              - level  indef  10  2 zombification
Cure Blindness            1 1 tar      -  10  0 cure blindness
Cause Blindness           1 1 tar  indef  10  3 inflict blindness
Cure Disease              1 1 tar      -  NC  - cure disease
Cause Disease             1 1 tar 1d6*10 100  4 inflict disease
Dispel Magic              6 dia 3      -   4  3 removes effects
Prayer                 self     -    1/L   6  5 +1/-1 to-hit/s.t.
Remove Curse              1 1 tar      -   6  0 cure curse
Bestow Curse              1 1 tar   10/L   6  4 inflict curse

Magic-User                                   AI
Spell Name            Range  Area   Dur.  CT Pr Effect
-----------------     ----- ----- ------  -- -- -------------------------------
Burning Hands             1 1 tar      -   1  4 dam L fire
Charm Person             12 1 tar  indef   1  6 charm humanoid, null w/save
Detect Magic           self     -    2/L   1  0 highlight magical
Enlarge                 2/L 1 tar   10/L   1  0 increase Strength
Reduce                  2/L 1 tar   10/L   1  0 remove Enlarge
Friends                self     -    1/L   1  0 +2d4 Charisma
Magic Missile         6+4/L 1 tar      -   1  6 dam 1d4+1 per (L+1)/2
Protection from Evil      1 1 tar    2/L   1  1 +2 bonus to AC/s.t.
Protection from Good      1 1 tar    2/L   1  2 +2 bonus to AC/s.t.
Read Magic             self     -    2/L  NC  - identify spell scrolls
Shield                 self     -    5/L   1  3 +1 bonus to s.t. and more
Shocking Grasp            1 1 tar      -   1  4 dam 1d8+L electrical
Sleep                 3+4/L dia 3    5/L   1  7 inflict sleep

Detect Invisibility    self     -    5/L   2  1 see invisible
Invisibility              1 1 tar  indef   2  2 invisibility
Knock                     -  lock      -  NC  - magical unlock
Mirror Image           self     -    2/L   2  3 1d4 illusionary images
Ray of Enfeeblement   1+1/L 1 tar    1/L   2  2 -25% melee damage
Stinking Cloud            3   2x2    1/L   2  7 inflict nausea, choking w/save
Strength                  1 1 tar   60/L  NC  - +1d(4 or 6 or 8) Strength

Blink                  self     -    1/L   1  2 blink
Dispel Magic             12 dia 3      -   3  2 removes effects
Fireball             10+1/L dia ?      -   3  7 dam Ld6 fire, half w/save
Haste                     6 dia 5  3+1/L   3  3 double movement/attacks
Hold Person              12 4 tar    2/L   3  6 paralyze humanoids, null w/save
Invisibility, 10'         1 dia 3  indef   3  1 invisibility
Lightning Bolt        4+1/L  8 sq      -   3  7 dam Ld6 elect., half w/save
Prot. from Evil, 10'      1 1 tar    2/L   3  1 +2 bonus to AC/s.t.
Prot. from Good, 10'      1 1 tar    2/L   3  2 +2 bonus to AC/s.t.
Prot. Normal Missiles     1 1 tar   10/L   3  3 immunity to normal missiles
Slow                  9+1/L dia 5  3+1/L   3  5 half movement/attacks

Item                                         AI
Spell Name            Range  Area   Dur.  CT Pr Effect
-----------------     ----- ----- ------  -- -- -------------------------------
Restoration scroll        1 1 tar      -   6  0 restore 1 drained level
Potion of Speed        self     -    5d4   0  3 double movement/attacks
Keoghtum's Ointment       1 1 tar      -   0  1 cure 8+1d4 and disease
Potion of Giant Str.   self     -  50-80   0  1 Strength 21
Javelin of Lightning      9  3 sq      -   0  7 dam 20+1d6 elect., half w/save
Wand of Paralyzation      6 1 tar    5d4   0  7 paralyze any, half w/save
Potion of Healing      self     -      -   0  1 cure 2d4+2
Dust of Disappearance     1   var    var   0  2 invisible
Necklace of Missiles      7 dia 7      -   0  7 dam (1d3 * 2 + 1)d6
Wand of Magic Missiles   12 1 tar      -   0  6 dam 2d4+2
Manual of Bodily H.    self     -      -  NC  - Constitution +1 after 1 month

SECTION 8.5 - Temple Spells
---------------------------

The following curative spells are available in temples.

                     Gold
Spell                Cost
Cure Blindness       1000
Cure Disease         1000
Cure Light Wounds     100  Restores 1d8 hit points
Cure Serious Wounds   350  Restores 2d8+1 hit points
Cure Critical Wounds  600  Restores 3d8+3 hit points
Neutralize Poison    1000  Restores life to a poisoned character
Raise Dead           5500  Does not require resurrection survival roll
Remove Curse         3500
Stone to Flesh       2000  Does not require system shock roll

Raise Dead works in several special ways:
* It works on Animated characters.
* There is no chance of failure; the manual suggests the Constitution survival
  roll exists, but it doesn't.
* It works on elves, even though it's not supposed to.  A temple is thus
  more skilled at healing your party than it ever will be itself.  This is
  similar to how a lot of other classic CRPGs work (examples include Wizardry
  1/2/3/5; Ultima 3/6; Might and Magic 1 through 8; Bard's Tale 1/2) even
  though this doesn't happen in the tabletop game.
* It always deducts one point of Constitution, all the way down to 0 (it cannot
  drop below 0).
* It can reduce your maximum hit points.

Heal, Restoration, and Resurrection are not available.


SECTION 9.1 - Item Basic Mechanics
----------------------------------

Standard coin valuation is as follows:

10 copper pieces (cp)   = 1 silver piece
20 silver pieces (sp)   = 1 gold piece
 2 electrum pieces (ep) = 1 gold piece
 1 platinum pieces (pp) = 5 gold pieces

Whenever you are asked for gold, platinum is always acceptable.  The converse
is not necessarily true.

A quick way to exchange a large number of low-value coins is to go to a shop,
pool all your money, then buy something cheap like a stack of arrows.

Gems and jewelry have random values, and must be individually appraised in a
shop.  You should sell immediately at full value; otherwise, they will go to
regular inventory slots and subsequently only sell at half value.

To determine the value of a gem, roll 1d100:
  Roll  Gold Value
  1-25          10  A gem sells for an average of 275 gold.
 26-50          50
 51-70         100
 71-90         500
 91-99        1000
   100        5000

To determine the value of a piece of jewelry, roll 1d100:
  Roll  Gold Value
  1-10   100-  999  The game will pick any integer in the indicated range, not
 11-20   200- 1199    just nice even multiples of 100 or 1000.  Yes, you are
 21-40   300- 1799    deprived of 1 gold of maximum value.  Also, if you sell,
 41-50   500- 2999    you lose any gold that cannot be converted into platinum.
 51-70  1000- 5999  A piece of jewelry sells for an average of ~2910 gold.
 71-90  2000- 7999
91-100  2000-11999

10 coins (or gems, or pieces of jewelry) weigh 1 pound.  (Those coins are
heavy!  They get lighter in later editions.)

Items do not have fully consistent attributes in the Gold Box games.  There are
many cases of almost identical items that are slightly different, most often in
value.  You'll notice this if you collect equipment from monsters and try to
sell it -- monster equipment is worth much less than shop equipment.  For that
reason a fully comprehensive description of each item is not given below.

Armor and weapons are based on "Armour & Weapons" by Charles John ffoulkes
(1909); yes that's a "ff", you find that in medieval English names.
Historiography has progressed in the century-plus since then.

Inventory items have a standard value that shops appraise them at.  If you sell
any item to a shop, the usual offer is half its value; arrows or bolts sell at
5% of value.

Items have a weight measured in coins.  An item is considered:
  * light if it is less than 2.5 pounds
  * medium if it is 2.5 pounds to 25.5 pounds
  * heavy if it is more than 25.5 pounds

Most magical items can be readily identified as magical with the Detect Magic
spell, and their properties can often be deduced by the effect on your visible
statistics, but the only way to formally identify most of them is to pay a shop
to do so, which costs 200 gold.  Magical scrolls may be formally identified
with the Read Magic spell.

Magical items are worth multiples of 400 experience, varying with the item.
Items that have a plus are worth 400 XP per magical plus, and Bracers of
Defense are worth 400 XP per point of AC they grant.  Money is worth:

      Type  Experience
    copper       0.005  This experience gets divided by the number of people
    silver        0.05    in your party and rounded down.
  electrum         0.5
      gold           1
  platinum           5
       gem         250
   jewelry        2200

SECTION 9.2.1 - Basic Weapons
-----------------------------

The table below describes standard weaponry you can buy.

#: base item ID.
"Name": if you find a "Heavy Crossbow", in your characters' hands it actually
  functions as a Fine Composite Long Bow.
"Weight (coins)": any fractions are rounded down.  Note that most weapons in
  D&D 1E/2E weigh FAR more than their real-life versions.
"Value (gold)": what a shop will think it is worth when it is buying it from
  you, which is not quite the same as what you can buy it for.
"H": hands needed to equip the item.  (Bastard swords are always two-handed in
  this game.)
"T": damage type: B for bashing, P for piercing, S for slashing.  Some monsters
  may take reduced damage from specific damage types; the most common case is
  skeletons taking half damage from P or S weapons.  Some of these also don't
  make much sense (all of them P and S getting reversed); the only case where
  that makes any difference is against a Juju Zombie.  The game does not
  support having more than one damage type, which in real life was why many of
  these weapons even existed.
"Damage v. S/M": damage weapon does against Small or Medium opponents (default)
"Damage v. L+": damage weapon does against Large or larger opponents (either
  defined as Large in tabletop, or has an icon that is 2 tiles tall)
"Thrown Range": this weapon may also be thrown; ranges are short/medium/long.

MELEE WEAPONS              Weight  Value        Damage  Damage
  # Name                  (coins) (gold)  H  T  v. S/M   v. L+  Thrown Range
  1 Battle Axe                 75      5  1  P     1d8     1d8
  2 Hand Axe                   50      1  1  S     1d6     1d4  1/2/3
  3 Bardiche                  125      7  2  S     2d4     3d4
  4 Bec De Corbin             100      6  2  S     1d8     1d6
  5 Bill-Guisarme             150      6  2  S     2d4    1d10
  6 Bo Stick                   15      1  1  B     1d6     1d3
  7 Club                       30      1  1  B     1d6     1d3  1/2/3
  8 Dagger                     10      2  1  P     1d4     1d3
 10 Fauchard                   60      3  2  S     1d6     1d8
 11 Fauchard-Fork              80      8  2  S     1d8    1d10
 12 Flail                     150      3  1  B   1d6+1     2d4
 13 Military Fork              75      4  2  S     1d8     2d4
 14 Glaive                     75      6  2  S     1d6    1d10
 15 Glaive-Guisarme           100     10  2  S     2d4     2d6
 16 Guisarme                   80      5  2  S     2d4     1d8
 17 Guisarme-Voulge           150      7  2  S     2d4     2d4
 18 Halberd                   175      9  2  S    1d10     2d6
 19 Lucern Hammer             150      7  2  P     2d4     1d6
 20 Hammer                     50      1  1  B   1d4+1     1d4  1/2/3
 22 Jo Stick                   40      1  1  B     1d6     1d4
 23 Mace                      100      8  1  B   1d6+1     1d6
 24 Morning Star              125      5  1  B     2d4   1d6+1
 25 Partisan                   80     10  2  S     1d6   1d6+1
 26 Military Pick              60      8  1  P   1d6+1     2d4
 27 Awl Pike                   80      3  2  P     1d6    1d12
 29 Ranseur                    50      4  2  S     2d4     2d4
 30 Scimitar                   40     15  1  S     1d8     1d8
 31 Spear                      50      1  2  P     1d6     1d8  1/2/3
 32 Spetum                     50      3  2  S   1d6+1     2d6
 33 Quarter Staff              50      1  2  B     1d6     1d6
 34 Bastard Sword             100     25  2  S     2d4     2d8
 35 Broad Sword                75     10  1  S     2d4   1d6+1
 36 Long Sword                 60     15  1  S     1d8    1d12
 37 Short Sword                35      8  1  S     1d6     1d8
 38 Two-Handed Sword          250     30  2  S    1d10     3d6
 39 Trident                    50      4  1  S   1d6+1     3d4
 40 Voulge                    125      2  2  S     2d4     2d4

For the below, "Range" gives how far short, medium, and long range are; "RoF"
is rate of fire (number of missiles that can be launched per round).  Notes:
* Holy water only works against vulnerable enemies (i.e., undead).
* Flasks of Oil inflict untyped damage, not fire damage.
* The tabletop version does not define launcher weights.
* Boulders require Strength 19 to use.  (I don't think Large Boulders actually
  exist anywhere, which is why I don't know how much they weigh.)
LAUNCHERS                  Weight  Value        Damage  Damage
  # Name                  (coins) (gold)  H  T  v. S/M   v. L+   Range    RoF
 41 Composite Long Bow         80    100  2  shoots arrows       7/14/21  2
 42 Composite Short Bow        50     75  2  shoots arrows       6/12/18  2
 43 Long Bow                  100     60  2  shoots arrows       7/14/21  2
 44 Short Bow                  50     15  2  shoots arrows       5/10/15  2
 45 Fine Composite Long Bow    60  25000  2  shoots arrows w/Str 6/12/19  2
 46 Light Crossbow             50     12  2  shoots quarrels     6/12/18  1
 47 Sling                       2      0  1  B   1d4+1   1d6+1   6/12/20  1
AMMUNITION
 28 Quarrel                     0.15   0  0  P     1d4     1d4
 73 Arrow                       0.4    0  0  S     1d6     1d6
THROWN WEAPONS
  9 Dart                        0.5    0  1  P     1d3     1d2   1/2/5    3
 21 Javelin                    10      0  1  P     1d6     1d6   2/4/6    1
 85 Holy Water Vial            10     25  1  S     1d6     1d6   1/2/3    1
 86 Flask of Oil               30      1  1  S     2d6     2d6   1/2/3    1
 87 Boulder                  4500      0  2  B   1d8+8   1d8+8   3/6/9    1
 88 Large Boulder               ?      ?  2  B  1d12+8  1d12+8   3/6/9    1

SILVER WEAPONS
These perform the same as their regular equivalents, except they can do damage
to some monsters immune to regular weapons.
                           Weight  Value        Damage  Damage
  # Name                  (coins) (gold)  H  T  v. S/M   v. L+
  8 Silver Dagger              10     20  1  P     1d4     1d3
 23 Silver Mace               100     80  1  B   1d6+1     1d6
 34 Silver Bastard Sword      100    250  2  S     2d4     2d8
 35 Silver Broad Sword         75    100  1  S     2d4   1d6+1
 36 Silver Long Sword          60    150  1  S     1d8    1d12
 37 Silver Short Sword         35     80  1  S     1d6     1d8
 38 Silver Two-Handed Sword   250    300  2  S    1d10     3d6

 28 Silver Quarrel              3     20  0  P     1d4     1d4
 73 Silver Arrow                0.5    1  0  S     1d6     1d6

SECTION 9.2.2 - Basic Armor
---------------------------

The table below describes standard armor you can buy.

#: base item ID.
"Name": note that "mail" here doesn't have the modern technical meaning of
  specifically armor made of linked rings.  By 1E rules, "plate armor" is
  different from "plate mail", and is too technologically advanced to exist.
  Sometimes you run into items called "plate armor", but they function as plate
  mail and not plate armor.  In later editions of the tabletop game or the
  Krynn Gold Xox games, plate armor is available, and is better than plate
  mail.
"Weight (coins)": these numbers make more sense than the weapon numbers above.
"Value (gold)": what a shop will think it is worth when it is buying it from
  you, which is not quite the same as what you can buy it for.
"AC": bonus to Armor Class provided by wearing this.
"Max Move": maximum normal movement while wearing this armor, if you are
  otherwise not heavily burdened.
There is no functional difference between a Brass Mirror and a Silver Mirror.
The holy symbols of Sune and Tempus have no function.

BODY ARMOR                 Weight  Value       Max
  # Name                  (coins) (gold)  AC  Move
 50 Leather Armor             150      5   2    12
 51 Padded Armor              100      4   2    12 (supposed to be 9)
 52 Studded Leather Armor     200     15   3     9
 53 Ring Mail                 250     30   3     9
 54 Scale Mail                400     45   4     6
 55 Chain Mail                300     75   5     9
 56 Splint Mail               400     80   6     6
 57 Banded Mail               350     90   6     9
 58 Plate Mail                450    400   7     6
HELD IN OFF-HAND
 59 Shield                    100     15   1
 71 Brass Mirror               10     10   0  can reflect/stop gaze attacks
 71 Silver Mirror              10     20   0  can reflect/stop gaze attacks
 71 Wooden Holy Symbol of Tyr  30      1   0  can stop vampire gaze attacks

FANCY BODY ARMOR (these don't accomplish anything additional)
 55 Silver Chain Mail         300    750   5     9
 58 Silver Plate Mail         450   4000   7     6

SECTION 9.2.3 - Other Items
---------------------------

Other base items in this game have the following base item IDs:

  # Name
 61 Magic-User Scroll
 62 Clerical Scroll
 63 Gauntlets of Ogre Power
 67 Cloak (non-Displacement)
 68 Boots
 69 Ring (non-Protection)
 70 [lots of different items are this]
 71 Holy Symbol [of Sune/Tempus/Tyr] or Potion (non-Giant-Strength)
 72 [lots of different items are this]
 74 Leather Holy Symbol [of Bane]
 75 Brass Key
 76 Cursed Necklace
 77 Bracers
 78 Wand (non-Magic-Missiles)
 79 Wand of Magic Missiles
 82 Efreeti Bottle
 84 Potion of Giant Strength
 87 Boulder
 88 Large Boulder (not used anywhere as far as I know)
 90 Ring of Feather Falling
 91 Pass
 92 Cloak of Displacement (separate from other cloaks as it provides AC)
 93 Ring of Protection (separate from other rings as it provides AC)

SECTION 9.3 - Magic Items
-------------------------

Standard magical melee weapons and thrown weapons add their magical bonus both
both to hit and to damage.  Bows and crossbows also do the same (they only add
to hit starting in Secret of the Silver Blades); arrows and bolts add their
magical bonus only to damage.

Standard magical armor add their plus as a bonus to Armor Class when worn, and
if its base armor type decreases movement, the magical version increases net
movement by 3.

Magical scrolls come in both clerical and magic-user types.    Spellcasting
from a scroll is instantaneous, and have an effective spell level of whichever
is higher of either 6, or the minimum class level needed to cast the spell plus
1.  (So in Pool of Radiance, it will always be 6.)

Magic-user spells may be permanently learned from the scroll, which consumes
that use of the spell.  In later games, thieves of at least level 10 may
attempt to use such scrolls.

Clerical spells include Restoration, which in this game may only be cast from
scrolls.  This will restore lost levels to a character that has been drained by
level-draining undead, but you will still lose any progress towards the next
level.

Magical wands start with a defined number of charges if not random, often less
than the 80+1d20 you would find in the tabletop game.  In general, charged
items in the tabletop game are far more useful than they are in CRPGs; regular
spellcasting is much faster and stronger than it is supposed to be.

If using a magical item that is not a scroll, it has an effective spell level
of 12.

You may not equip more than two magical rings at once.

Other magical items include:

Bag of Holding -- If equipped, causes all coins and unequipped items to have no
  weight, with an upper limit of 5000 coins of extra carrying capacity.  It may
  take multiple pick up attempts to actually pick up this extra weight (which
  is a bug).  (This is equivalent to the type the DMG says you get on a roll of
  31...70.)
Bracers of Defense ("Bracers AC #") -- These do not count as armor and will not
  stack with it, but will set base Armor Class to the indicated number.  It's
  generally the defensive equipment of choice on thieves and pure magic-users.
Cloak of Displacement -- Grants a -2 bonus to Armor Class; the first physical
  attack per combat will automatically miss.  Also grants a +2 bonus to saving
  throws if found as a random item; the one guarded by the basilisk in Mendor's
  Library doesn't.  (If Dispel Magic is cast upon the wearer, you may need to
  unequip and re-equip the cloak for it to work again.)
Cloak of Elvenkind -- This makes the wearer invisible 95% of the time; this is
  checked every minute, and if the roll succeeds the wearer is granted
  invisibility for 1 minute.  (In the tabletop version, you must be outside,
  and the quality of the invisibility depends upon terrain.)
Cursed Necklace -- This penalizes both AC and all saving throws by 5.  This is
  bad for actual gameplay, but fantastic for experiments.
Dust of Disappearance -- This will make invisible:
  * out of combat: the entire party for (2d10) * 10 minutes
  * in combat: up to 4 creatures at range 1 for (1d10 + 10) * 10 minutes
  This is a special form of invisibility that is not dispelled by attacking or
  spellcasting, nor does the ability to see invisible work on it.  Yes, it is
  very powerful -- there is a reason this does not exist at all in Gold Box
  games later than Curse of the Azure Bonds.  This effect is described in
  "D"isplay as "invisible", which differs from the normal "invisibility".
Efreeti Bottle -- The efreeti in this bottle will emerge to help you fight
  against the vampire in the Valhingen Graveyard when you first encounter it.
Gauntlets of Ogre Power -- Wearing this raises Strength to 18(00).
Javelin of Lightning -- This single-shot consumable creates a lightning bolt
  that does 20+1d6 electrical damage.  This acts like the magic-user spell, but
  with a range of 9, and the bolt only travels 3 squares.
Keoghtum's Ointment -- A jar of this has 5 applications, each of which will
  restores 8+1d4 hit points of damage and cure disease.  (The tabletop version
  of "Keoghtom's" ointment also neutralizes poison.  The Gold Box version seems
  to convert poisoned characters to outright dead ones.  I don't think that's
  the intended meaning of "neutralize".)
Long Sword +2 Flame Tongue -- This is supposed to do extra damage against
  creatures that use cold, birds, undead, or fire-vulnerable creatures, but it
  doesn't.  It also should prevent trolls from regenerating, but that doesn't
  happen either (and it doesn't do extra damage against those as it should).
  So this is just a Long Sword +2.
Manual of Bodily Health -- Using this book consumes it; after 24 hours, the
  user will start to train over the course of one month (always 30 days in the
  Forgotten Realms).  At the end, +1 permanent Constitution is gained.  An
  attempt to adjust hit points is made, but that function has several bugs.
  Unlike the tabletop game, you may benefit from such an item more than once,
  and you can in fact use and benefit from several at once.  This is the only
  way to permanently gain base statistics in any of the Gold Box games (without
  exploiting transfer bugs).
Necklace of Missiles -- shoots range 7 fireballs (as the 3rd-level magic-user
  spell) that do (1d3 * 2 + 1)d6 damage.  Normally, this only has several
  charges; if you find this as a random magical item, it typically has 20.
  (This is closest to the type rolled on 9...12 in the DMG.)
Potion of Extra Healing -- has three doses, each of which restores 1d8 hit
  points of damage; internally identical to casting Cure Light Wounds.
Potion of Giant Strength -- grants frost giant (21) Strength for 4+1d4 turns
  (50-80 minutes), which confers the ability to throw boulders.
Potion of Healing -- restores 2d4+2 hit points of damage.
Potion of Speed -- acts as a Haste spell that lasts for 5d4 rounds: removes
  any Slow effect, and doubles movement and number of physical attacks, at the
  cost of magically aging the user by 1 year.
Ring of Feather Falling -- prevents falling damage.  Or at least it is supposed
  to; it doesn't actually prevent damage from falls that I have seen.
Ring of Fire Resistance -- grants a +4 bonus to saving throws against fire, and
  subtracts 2 (minimum 1) from each die of damage.
Ring of Invisibility -- this casts the Invisibility spell on the wearer when
  equipped, at the end of every round of combat.  This is unlimited, but the
  invisibility effect lasts only for 1 minute every time.
Ring of Protection -- this grants its bonus of the best ring: (1) to Armor
  Class if the wearer is not also wearing magical armor; (2) to all saving
  throws.  The second effect is not present on most Rings of Protection; the
  only one I know of where this actually works is the one carried by the
  THEURGIST (#110).  (The saving throw bonus becomes more common in later
  Gold Box games.)
Sling of Seeking +2 -- this grants its bonus both to hit and to damage.
Wand of Fireballs -- shoots fireballs (as the 3rd-level magic-user spell) which
  which do 6d6 damage.  (The saving throw should be vs. rod/staff/wand, but is
  vs. spell.)
Wand of Lightning (Bolt) -- shoots lightning bolts (as the 3rd-level magic-user
  spell) which do 6d6 damage.  (The saving throw should be vs. rod/staff/wand,
  but is vs. spell.)
Wand of Magic Missiles -- shoots 2 magic missiles (as the 1st-level magic-user
  spell), which do 2d4+2 damage at range 12 to a single target (and aren't
  blocked by the Shield spell).
Wand of Paralyzation -- attempts to hold any single monster (range 6) for 5d4
  rounds; a saving throw vs. paralyzation negates.  (The DMG says to use rod/
  staff/wand.)

Magical treasure is also worth experience.  Any magical item with a plus is
worth 400 XP per plus.  Other cases:
* Bracers or Cloaks of Displacement count as +1 per point of AC they grant;
* Minuses do not count against you;
* A stack of ammunition counts as a single item;
* Scrolls count usually count as +1 (always if randomly generated), sometimes
  +2;
* Miscellaneous magical items usually count as +1 (always if randomly
  generated), but can be higher (some placed wands count as +10).

SECTION 9.4 - Random Magical Items
----------------------------------

Here's how random magical generation works in v1.3 (it's known to work
differently in v1.0, or in any other Gold Box game):

Roll 1d100 for item type:

* Item type 1...60: weapon/armor.  Roll 1d100 for weapon/armor type, then roll
  1d20 for plus: 1...14 is +1, 15...19 is +2, 20 is +3.
  * Weapon/armor type 1...20, 22...44, 46...47, or 50...59: weapon or armor of
    this specific type (see section 9.2 for which one).  Darts are generated
    in stacks of 5, bolts in stacks of 10, anything else is singular.
  * Weapon/armor type 21: javelin.  Roll 1d5 for javelin type:
    * Javelin type 1...4: magical regular Javelin
    * Javelin type 5: should be a Javelin of Lightning, but it looks like there
      was a typo in the source here; you'll instead get a buggy item with
      hard-to-predict name and behavior.
  * Weapon/armor type 45: this normally would be a Fine Composite Long Bow, but
    this is special-cased so you can't actually get a magical one; this is
    replaced by a Shield (which is also possible in the generic list).
  * Weapon/armor type 60...90: sword.  Roll 1d10 (all of these are also in
    the above generic list):
    * Sword type 1...4: Long Sword
    * Sword type 5...7: Broad Sword
    * Sword type 8: Bastard Sword
    * Sword type 9: Short Sword
    * Sword type 10: Two-Handed Sword
  * Weapon/armor type 91...94: Arrows, in a stack of 10
  * Weapon/armor type 95...97: Ring of Protection.  Only provides an AC bonus
    and not also a saving throw bonus.
  * Weapon/armor type 98...100: Bracers of Defense.  The magical plus is
    converted here to AC 6 (70%), AC 4 (25%), or AC 2 (5%).
  * Weapon/armor type 48...49: Not handled in the code; this results in an item
    with no name that does nothing.
* Item type 61...85: Magic-user scroll.  Roll 1d3 for number of spells, then
  for each spell roll 1d3 for spell level.  Spells of the same level have equal
  probability.  Always worth 400 XP.
* Item type 86...92: Clerical scroll.  Roll 1d3 for number of spells, the
  for each spell roll 1d3 for spell level; Restoration is not possible.  Spells
  of the same level have equal probability.  Always worth 400 XP.
* Item type 93...98: (technically 91...98, but 91...92 are trapped by the
  above) Miscellaneous item.  Except as noted, any item generated either here
  or in the 99...100 roll is worth 400 XP.
  * Miscellaneous item type 1...7: Non-Giant-Strength potion.  Roll 1d11 for
    type:
    * Potion type 1...5: Potion of Healing
    * Potion type 6...8: Potion of Extra Healing
    * Potion type 9: Potion of Speed
    * Potion type 10: Keoghtum's Ointment (5 applications), only possible here
    * Potion type 11: buggy item with hard-to-predict name and behavior
  * Miscellaneous item type 8...9: Other item.  Roll 1d10 for type:
    * Other item type 1...7: Necklace of Missiles (20 charges)
    * Other item type 8...10: Bag of Holding, only possible here
  * Miscellaneous item type 10: Potion of Giant Strength
  * Miscellaneous item type 11...12: Non-Magic-Missile wand.  Roll 1d3+1 for
    type:
    * Wand type 1: Wand of Lightning (can't get here: can't roll 1 on 1d3+1)
    * Wand type 2: Wand of Paralyzation (20 charges)
    * Wand type 3: Wand of Fireballs (20 charges), only possible here
    * Wand type 4: buggy item with hard-to-predict name and behavior
  * Miscellaneous item type 13...14: Wand of Magic Missiles (30 charges)
  * Miscellaneous item type 15: Cloak of Displacement, worth 800 XP; also
    provides a +2 bonus to all saving throws, unlike non-random Cloaks of
    Displacement.
  * Miscellaneous item type 16: Cloak of Elvenkind, only possible here
* Type type 99...100: Non-Protection ring.  Roll 1d10 for type:
  * Ring type 1: Ring of Feather Falling
  * Ring type 2...6: Ring of Fire Resistance
  * Ring type 7...10: Ring of Invisibility, only possible here

SECTION 9.5 - Summary of Locations with Magic Items
---------------------------------------------------

Here is a checklist of noteworthy magical items you may find in the game, by
location.  Numbers indicate locations on the corresponding maps.  This is not
comprehensive for sake of brevity; check the maps' notes for more details.

Civilized Area (New Phlan)
Once you become strong enough, and are about to be rewarded for completing a
commission (and you don't mind being a murderhobo), you can fight the city
guards for magical items, then get the mission reward to negate anger:
4TH LVL FIGHTER (#41): Long Sword +1, Chain Mail +1
6TH LVL FIGHTER (#75): Two-Handed Sword +2, Chain Mail +1, Javelin of Lightning
7TH LVL CLERIC (#83): Mace +2, Banded Mail +2
8TH LVL FIGHTER (#85): Two-Handed Sword +2, Plate Mail +2, Ring of Protection
  +3
LEVEL 3 MU (#94): Wand of Magic Missiles (67 charges)

The Slums
1 - Clerical Scroll (Cure Light Wounds, Cure Light Wounds)
2 - Leather Armor +1
3 - 1 random magic item
5 - Short Bow +1, 20 Arrows +1
6 - Bracers AC 6
9 - 3 Broad Swords +1, Chain Mail +1, Flail +1
10 - Ring of Protection +1, Short Bow +1
12 - Short Bow +1, 20 Arrows +1
16 - Shield +1, Magic-User Scroll (Magic Missile)
20 - 3 random magic items

Sokal Keep
15 - Hammer +1
17 - Shield +1, Long Sword +1, Chain Mail +1, Mace +2

Kuto's Well
22 - Banded Mail +1, Quarter Staff +1, Bracers AC 4

Kuto's Well Catacombs
12 - Long Sword +1

Mendor's Library
5 - Potion of Giant Strength, Cloak of Displacement,
    Clerical Scroll (Restoration, Restoration)
8 - 3 Potions of Extra Healing
13 - Manual of Bodily Health

Podal Plaza
2 - 2 Long Swords +1

Cadorna Textile House
18 - Magic-User Scroll (Reduce, Detect Invisibility, Fireball),
     Magic-User Scroll (Burning Hands, Mirror Image, Blink)
21 - Gauntlets of Ogre Power (wherever you get the box opened; it is possible
     to exploit a bug to get this more than once)

Kovel Mansion
9 - Short Sword +2, Leather Armor +4
12 - Magic-User Scroll (Fireball, Haste, Hold Person),
     Magic-User Scroll (Blink, Ray of Enfeeblement, Slow),
     Clerical Scroll (Hold Person, Cure Blindness, Bestow Curse),
     Clerical Scroll (Prayer, Remove Curse, Animate Dead),
     Magic-User Scroll (Reduce, Detect Invisibility, Fireball),
     Magic-User Scroll (Burning Hands, Mirror Image, Blink)
14 - Shield +2, Chain Mail +1

Wealthy Area
3 - Potion of Extra Healing, Ring of Feather Falling,
    Clerical Scroll (Animate Dead, Cure Blindness)

Temple of Bane
1 - Clerical Scroll (Animate Dead, Cause Disease, Prayer),
    Magic-User Scroll (Fireball, Ray of Enfeeblement, Stinking Cloud)
2 - Potion of Giant Strength, Potion of Speed, Wand of Magic Missiles (20
     charges), Dust of Disappearance

Wilderness Lairs (all repeatable)
Western Wilderness, Thri-Kreen Lair 13: 1 random magic item
Eastern Wilderness, Wyvern Lair 2: 1 random magic item
Eastern Wilderness, Giant Lizard Lair 8: 1 random magic item

Nomad Camp
If you attack the nomads: Long Sword +2, Shield +1, Scale Mail +2, Dagger +2,
  Bracers AC 4 (says AC 2, actually is AC 4), Wand of Magic Missiles (50
  charges)
If you attack only the kobolds: Two-Handed Sword +2, Wand of Magic Missiles
  (35 charges)

Kobold Caves
9 - 2 Two-Handed Swords +2
26 - 2 random magic items
27 - Magic-User Scroll (Charm Person, Protection from Evil, Strength),
     Magic-User Scroll (Friends, Invisibility, Protection from Normal Missiles)

Yarash's Pyramid
19 - 3 random magic items
20 - 3 random magic items
21 - 3 random magic items
25 - Bracers AC 4, Wand of Paralyzation (23 charges), Potion of Speed

Lizardman Keep
P4, P5, P6 (three different locations) - Shield +2

Buccaneer Base
The captain carries: Long Sword +4, Shield +2, Plate Mail +3

Zhentil Keep Outpost
5 - Gauntlets of Ogre Power, Plate Mail +2, Shield +1, 2 Rings of Fire
    Resistance, 3 Potions of Extra Healing, Javelin of Lightning, Bracers AC 3,
    Wand of Lightning (20 charges)

Valhingen Graveyard
5 - 4 Clerical Scrolls (Restoration, Restoration)
8 - Wand of Lightning Bolt (3 charges), 2 Clerical Scrolls (Restoration,
    Restoration)
12 - Hammer +3, Sling of Seeking +2, Potion of Extra Healing,
     Clerical Scroll (Restoration, Restoration),
     Magic-User Scroll (Slow, Hold Person, Invisibility 10' Radius)
24 - Plate Mail +2, Long Sword +2 (lawful good), Ring of Fire Resistance,
     Shield +1, 4 Clerical Scrolls (Restoration, Restoration)
26 - Ring of Protection +2
28 - Wand of Magic Missiles (33 charges), Shield +1,
     5 Clerical Scrolls (Restoration, Restoration)

Stojanow Gate
2 - Ring of Protection +2
13 - 2 Rings of Protection +2

Valjevo Castle
10 - Mace +3, Plate Mail +1, Necklace of Missiles (6 charges)
11 - 2 Long Swords +3 (lawful evil)
14 - Long Sword +2 Flame Tongue
18 - Potion of Speed

Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze
1 - Bracers AC 3, Ring of Fire Resistance, Wand of Lightning (20 charges)
5 - Long Sword +5, Ring of Protection +3, Gauntlets of Ogre Power

Valjevo Castle Inner Tower
7 - Wand of Lightning (56 charges)
8 - 12 Two-Handed Swords +2, 12 Plate Mails +2, 12 Rings of Protection +3


SECTION 10.1 - Notes on Creature Statistics
-------------------------------------------

Many monsters capable of using equipment can equip or remove weapons, shields,
and sometimes even armor on the fly.  Their actual statistics in combat may not
reflect the details in the next section, especially if you surprise them before
they can ready equipment.  It is assumed that enemies with both melee and
ranged weaponry are using the former.

THAC0, damage and AC are adjusted for monsters according to equipment; these
statistics (for melee) are shown below.  THAC0 is not recalculated for
Strength or Dexterity.  Armor supersedes base AC, but only if it is better.

No other attributes are adjusted; a humanoid with a Ring of Fire Resistance
does not actually resist fire, movement is not affected by armor, and fighter-
types do not get number of attacks recalculated.

If a creature has secondary attacks, those are used before primary attacks.

A "Larger or larger" monster may be so in two ways: by being declared that way,
or by having an icon of more than one tile.  Either way, large monster weapon
damage applies to it.
* The note (small icon) indicates it has a one-tile icon.
* The note (reversed) indicates it is declared small/medium in the game files.

Hit dice are important to many spell effects, though the Gold Box games do not
bother to track partial hit dice as the tabletop game does.  Every 4 fractional
hit dice are generally converted to a single whole hit die.

Non-character base statistics are used as follows:
  Strength - affects melee weapon damage (but not unarmed attacks)
  Intelligence - affects decision to flee or surrender
  Wisdom - no effect
  Dexterity - affects initiative and AC
  Constitution - no effect
  Charisma - no effect

Monster #82 never appears anywhere.

SECTION 10.2 - Detailed Bestiary
--------------------------------

#000 KOBOLD          Lawful Evil Monstrous Humanoid Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   3  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  6      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 16
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            17
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     18
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  20
Charisma     10      Spell                          19
THAC0:  21  Armor Class: 7 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 16 copper
Items carried: Short Sword
Experience for defeating: 5 + 1 per hit point (8)

#001 KOBOLD LEADER   Lawful Evil Monstrous Humanoid Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   4  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    12      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 32 copper; 2 silver
Items carried: Short Bow; Arrow (20); Short Sword; Shield; Studded Leather
  Armor
Experience for defeating: 8 + 2 per hit point (16)

#002 GOBLIN GUARD    Lawful Evil Monstrous Humanoid Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   4  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 18 silver
Items carried: Short Sword; Shield; Studded Leather Armor
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (14)

#003 GOBLIN LEADER   Lawful Evil Monstrous Humanoid Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   7  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    12      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 24 silver
Items carried: Arrow (20); Long Bow; Short Sword; Shield; Scale Mail
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (17) + 1 for money (18)

#004 ORC             Lawful Evil Monstrous Humanoid Fighter
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Fighter 1
Hit Points:   5  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  6      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 8)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Money carried: 24 silver
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (15) + 1 for money (16)

#005 ORC LEADER      Lawful Evil Monstrous Humanoid Fighter
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Fighter 1
Hit Points:   8  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    12      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  16  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Money carried: 4 silver; 20 electrum
Items carried: Battle Axe; Chain Mail; Arrow (7); Long Bow
Experience for defeating: 28 + 2 per hit point (44) + 10 for money (54)

#006 HOBGOBLIN       Lawful Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   2  Character Levels    : Fighter 2
Hit Points:   6  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  18  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Money carried: 18 copper; 7 gold
Items carried: Long Sword
Experience for defeating: 20 + 2 per hit point (32) + 7 for money (39)

#007 HOBGOBLIN LDR   Lawful Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   2  Character Levels    : Fighter 2
Hit Points:   6  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  18  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Money carried: 18 copper; 7 gold
Items carried: Long Sword; Arrow (12); Long Bow
Experience for defeating: 20 + 2 per hit point (32) + 7 for money (39)

#008 OGRE            Chaotic Evil Monstrous Humanoid Fighter
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Fighter 5
Hit Points:  21  Movement:   9   Size: Large or larger
Strength     18      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  6      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d10 damage
Money carried: 5 gold
Experience for defeating: 90 + 5 per hit point (195) + 5 for money (200)

#009 OGRE LEADER     Chaotic Evil Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Fighter 7
Hit Points:  32  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  12
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:   3  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Physical attack: 1 for 2d6 damage
Money carried: 7 gold
Items carried: Arrow (15); Long Bow
Experience for defeating: 225 + 8 per hit point (481) + 7 for money (488)

#010 QUICKLINGS      Chaotic Evil Extra-Dimensional Fighter
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Cleric 1; Fighter 1
Hit Points:   7  Movement:  96   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  2
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             5
Dexterity    18      Petrification or Polymorph      6
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   8
Charisma     10      Spell                           7
THAC0:  18  Armor Class: -3 (from behind: 3)
Physical attack: 3 for 1d4 damage
Money carried: 2 copper; 3 silver; 1 electrum; 2 gems
Experience for defeating: 200 + 3 per hit point (221) + 500 for money (721)
Footnote: Saving throws are as a 19th level cleric.

#011 KOBOLD LEADER   Lawful Evil Monstrous Humanoid Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   4  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    12      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 32 copper; 2 silver
Items carried: Bracers AC 6; Short Sword; Shield; Studded Leather Armor
Experience for defeating: 8 + 2 per hit point (16) + 1600 for items (1616)

#012 GOBLIN LEADER   Lawful Evil Monstrous Humanoid Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   7  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    12      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 24 silver
Items carried: Short Sword; Shield; Leather Armor +1
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (17) + 1 for money (18) + 400
  for items (418)

#013 ORC             Lawful Evil Monstrous Humanoid Fighter
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Fighter 1
Hit Points:   5  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  6      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 8)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Money carried: 24 silver
Items carried: Clerical Scroll (Cure Light Wounds, Cure Light Wounds)
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (15) + 1 for money (16) + 400
  for items (416)

#014 ORC LEADER      Lawful Evil Monstrous Humanoid Fighter
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Fighter 1
Hit Points:   8  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    12      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 2d4+1 damage
Money carried: 4 silver; 20 electrum
Items carried: Broad Sword +1; Chain Mail; Arrow (7); Long Bow
Experience for defeating: 28 + 2 per hit point (44) + 10 for money (54) + 400
  for items (454)

#015 ORC LEADER      Lawful Evil Monstrous Humanoid Fighter
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Fighter 1
Hit Points:   8  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    12      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+2 damage
Money carried: 4 silver; 20 electrum
Items carried: Flail +1; Chain Mail +1; Arrow (7); Long Bow
Experience for defeating: 28 + 2 per hit point (44) + 10 for money (54) + 800
  for items (854)

#017 SPECTRE         Lawful Evil Undead Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Spectre
Hit Dice  :   8  Character Levels    : Fighter 8
Hit Points:  38  Movement:  30   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  12
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  12  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Special Abilities: #109 immunity to paralysis; #117 vulnerability to holy
  water; #111 immunity to poison; #108 immunity to sleep and charm spells; #110
  immunity to cold; #86 melee level-draining attack (2 levels); #119 immunity
  to non-magical weapons
Experience for defeating: 1650 + 10 per hit point (2030)

#018 LARGE SCORPION  True Neutral Snake Fighter
Hit Dice  :   3  Character Levels    : Fighter 3
Hit Points:  10  Movement:   9   Size: Large or larger (reversed)
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Primary physical attack: 2 for 1d4 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 1d1 damage
Special Abilities: #66 save vs. poison at a +2 bonus on melee hit or die
Experience for defeating: 35 + 3 per hit point (65)

#019 FERRAN MARTINEZ Lawful Good Undead Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Spectre
Hit Dice  :   8  Character Levels    : Fighter 8
Hit Points:  38  Movement:  30   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  12
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  12  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Special Abilities: #109 immunity to paralysis; #111 immunity to poison; #108
  immunity to sleep and charm spells; #110 immunity to cold; #86 melee
  level-draining attack (2 levels); #119 immunity to non-magical weapons
Experience for defeating: 1650 + 10 per hit point (2030)

#020 WIGHT           Lawful Evil Undead Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Wight
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Fighter 5
Hit Points:  23  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4 damage
Special Abilities: #96 immunity to weapons that are neither magical nor silver;
  #109 immunity to paralysis; #111 immunity to poison; #110 immunity to cold;
  #108 immunity to sleep and charm spells; #85 melee level-draining attack (1
  level); #117 vulnerability to holy water
Experience for defeating: 540 + 5 per hit point (655)

#021 WRAITH          Lawful Evil Undead Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Wraith
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Fighter 6
Hit Points:  24  Movement:  24   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Special Abilities: #85 melee level-draining attack (1 level); #111 immunity to
  poison; #109 immunity to paralysis; #108 immunity to sleep and charm spells;
  #110 immunity to cold; #123 half damage from silver weapons; immunity to
  non-magical/silver weapons; #117 vulnerability to holy water
Experience for defeating: 575 + 6 per hit point (719)

#022 GIANT SKELETON  True Neutral Undead Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Mummy
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Fighter 5
Hit Points:  28  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     19      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 4d6 damage
Special Abilities: #117 vulnerability to holy water; #110 immunity to cold;
  #125 immunity to sleep, charm, paralysis, and poison; #115 half damage from
  piercing or slashing weapons
Items carried: Short Bow
Experience for defeating: 130 + 5 per hit point (270)

#023 VAMPIRE         Chaotic Evil Undead Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Vampire
Hit Dice  :   9  Character Levels    : Fighter 9
Hit Points:  43  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(76)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  8
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             9
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     10
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   9
Charisma     10      Spell                          11
THAC0:  14  Armor Class: 1 (from behind: 3)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+4 damage
Special Abilities: #84 charming gaze (free Charm Person every round; -2 penalty
  to save); #118 half damage from cold; #117 vulnerability to holy water; #114
  half damage from electricity; #126 suppressible gaze attack (by equipped
  mirrors or lawful good holy symbols); #125 immunity to sleep, charm,
  paralysis, and poison; #119 immunity to non-magical weapons; #103 can assume
  gaseous form; #98 regenerate 3 hit points per round; #86 melee level-draining
  attack (2 levels)
Items carried: Short Bow
Experience for defeating: 3800 + 12 per hit point (4316)

#024 LEVEL 6 MU      True Neutral Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Magic-User 6
Hit Points:  23  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 15      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 7 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4+2 damage
Spells memorized: M1 Magic Missile (2); M1 Sleep (2); M2 Mirror Image; M2
  Stinking Cloud; M3 Fireball (2)
Money carried: 20 copper; 15 silver
Items carried: Ring of Protection +2
Experience for defeating: 150 + 6 per hit point (288) + 800 for items (1088)

#025 MAD MAN         True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Fighter 1
Hit Points:   7  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+1 damage
Money carried: 2 silver
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (17)

#026 BASILISK        True Neutral Reptile Fighter
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Fighter 7
Hit Points:  31  Movement:   6   Size: Large or larger (reversed)
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  12
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d10 damage
Special Abilities: #127 reflectable gaze; #83 petrifying gaze (save vs.
  petrification or be turned to stone)
Experience for defeating: 1000 + 8 per hit point (1248)

#027 SKULLCRUSHER    Chaotic Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  39  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(81)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom        8      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    16      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 18      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     12      Spell                          16
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 8 (from behind: 12)
Physical attack: 1 for 2d1+6 damage
Experience for defeating: 60 + 4 per hit point (216)

#028 GRISHNAK        Chaotic Evil Monster Cleric/Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Cleric 6; Magic-User 6
Hit Points:  24  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength      9      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 16      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  9
Wisdom       16      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    13      Petrification or Polymorph     11
Constitution 11      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma      5      Spell                          12
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4 damage
Spells memorized: C1 Curse; C1 Cure Light Wounds (2); C1 Cause Light Wounds; C1
  Protection from Good; C2 Hold Person (4); C2 Silence, 15' Radius; C3 Cause
  Disease; C3 Bestow Curse
Experience for defeating: 275 + 6 per hit point (419)

#029 JUJU ZOMBIE     True Neutral Undead Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Spectre
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  24  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 8)
Physical attack: 1 for 3d4 damage
Special Abilities: #119 immunity to non-magical weapons; #94 half damage from
  blunt or piercing weapons; #93 half damage from fire; #91 immunity to
  electricity and Magic Missile; #110 immunity to cold; #117 vulnerability to
  holy water; #125 immunity to sleep, charm, paralysis, and poison
Thief skills: Climb Walls 90%
Items carried: Short Bow
Experience for defeating: 110 + 4 per hit point (206)

#031 TROLL           Chaotic Evil Regenerating Fighter
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Fighter 7
Hit Points:  36  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     19      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  12
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Primary physical attack: 2 for 1d4+4 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 2d6 damage
Special Abilities: #100 inflicting fire and acid damage stops revival (only
  works if all damage is fire and acid), can return from going down in 3d6
  minutes otherwise; #101 after being damaged, 3 minutes later begins
  regenerating 3 hit points per round
Experience for defeating: 525 + 8 per hit point (813)

#032 NORRIS THE GRAY Neutral Evil Half-Orc Fighter
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Fighter 5
Hit Points:  25  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    17      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  14  Armor Class: 1 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+2 damage
Items carried: Long Sword +1; Shield; Chain Mail
Experience for defeating: 215 + 400 for items (615)

#033 MACE            Lawful Evil Half-Orc Cleric
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Cleric 5
Hit Points:  25  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  9
Wisdom       17      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    17      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  17  Armor Class: 1 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+3 damage
Spells memorized: C1 Bless (2); C1 Curse; C1 Cause Light Wounds (2); C2 Hold
  Person (5); C3 Animate Dead; C3 Prayer
Items carried: Mace +1; Shield; Chain Mail
Experience for defeating: 215 + 400 for items (615)

#034 SKELETON        True Neutral Undead Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Skeleton
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Fighter 1
Hit Points:   5  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 7 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Special Abilities: #117 vulnerability to holy water; #110 immunity to cold;
  #125 immunity to sleep, charm, paralysis, and poison; #115 half damage from
  piercing or slashing weapons
Experience for defeating: 14 + 1 per hit point (19)

#035 ZOMBIE          True Neutral Undead Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Zombie
Hit Dice  :   2  Character Levels    : Fighter 2
Hit Points:  10  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity     0      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  16  Armor Class: 8 (from behind: 10)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Special Abilities: #110 immunity to cold; #117 vulnerability to holy water;
  #125 immunity to sleep, charm, paralysis, and poison
Experience for defeating: 20 + 2 per hit point (40)

#036 SWORDSMAN       Lawful Evil Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   3  Character Levels    : Fighter 3
Hit Points:  18  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     16      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    14      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  18  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+1 damage
Money carried: 5 silver
Items carried: Arrow (20); Long Bow; Chain Mail; Long Sword
Experience for defeating: 35 + 3 per hit point (89)

#038 POISONOUS FROG  True Neutral Reptile Fighter
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Fighter 1
Hit Points:   4  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 8 (from behind: 10)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d1 damage
Special Abilities: #65 save vs. poison at a +4 bonus on melee hit or die
Experience for defeating: 35 + 1 per hit point (39)

#039 HUGE SCORPION   True Neutral Snake Fighter
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Fighter 5
Hit Points:  20  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger (reversed)
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Primary physical attack: 2 for 1d8 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 1d3 damage
Special Abilities: #64 save vs. poison on melee hit or die
Experience for defeating: 90 + 5 per hit point (190)

#040 NOMAD           True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Fighter 1
Hit Points:   6  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 8)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 15 copper
Items carried: Arrow (20); Long Bow; Short Sword; Shield; Leather Armor
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (16)

#041 4TH LVL FIGHTER Lawful Evil Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  30  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    14      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 17      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  17  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+2 damage
Money carried: 3 electrum
Items carried: Shield; Chain Mail +1; Long Sword +1
Experience for defeating: 60 + 4 per hit point (180) + 1 for money (181) + 800
  for items (981)

#042 HASSAD          True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Fighter 6
Hit Points:  45  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 12      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     14      Spell                          14
THAC0:  11  Armor Class: 0 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+3 damage
Money carried: 15 copper
Items carried: Long Sword +2; Shield +1; Scale Mail +2
Experience for defeating: 150 + 6 per hit point (420) + 2000 for items (2420)

#043 SHAMAN          True Neutral Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Magic-User 5
Hit Points:  20  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 15      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            13
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     11
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          12
THAC0:  18  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4+2 damage
Spells memorized: M1 Magic Missile (2); M1 Sleep (2); M2 Mirror Image; M2
  Stinking Cloud; M3 Fireball
Money carried: 20 copper
Items carried: Wand of Magic Missiles (50 charges); Bracers AC 2; Dagger +2
Experience for defeating: 90 + 5 per hit point (190) + 3600 for items (3790)
Footnote: The Bracers AC 2 act as Bracers AC 4.

#044 ORC             Lawful Evil Monstrous Humanoid Fighter
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Fighter 1
Hit Points:   5  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 8)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Money carried: 12 electrum
Items carried: Arrow (30); Short Bow
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (15) + 6 for money (21)

#045 1ST LVL THIEF   Chaotic Neutral Human Thief
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Thief 1
Hit Points:   4  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    18      Petrification or Polymorph     14
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          15
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 10)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Thief skills: Pick Pocket 40%; Open Locks 40%; Find/Remove Traps 25%; Move
  Silently 25%; Hide in Shadows 20%; Hear Noise 10%; Climb Walls 85%
Money carried: 5 silver
Items carried: Leather Armor; Long Sword
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (14)

#048 DWARVEN FIGHTER Lawful Evil Dwarf Cleric
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Fighter 6
Hit Points:  50  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(91)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    14      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+6 damage
Money carried: 15 gold
Items carried: Gauntlets of Ogre Power; Chain Mail +1; Long Sword +1
Experience for defeating: 150 + 6 per hit point (450) + 15 for money (465) +
  2000 for items (2465)
Differences from tabletop: lacks dwarf AC/THAC0 bonuses

#049 MEDUSA          Lawful Evil Generic Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Fighter 6
Hit Points:  30  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4 damage
Special Abilities: #64 save vs. poison on melee hit or die; #127 reflectable
  gaze; #83 petrifying gaze (save vs. petrification or be turned to stone)
Experience for defeating: 725 + 6 per hit point (905)

#050 COMMANDANT      Lawful Evil Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   9  Character Levels    : Fighter 9
Hit Points: 100  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(51)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  8
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             9
Dexterity    16      Petrification or Polymorph     10
Constitution 17      Breath Weapon                   9
Charisma     14      Spell                          11
THAC0:  10  Armor Class: -3 (from behind: 3)
Physical attack: 1.5 for 1d8+5 damage
Money carried: 18 gold; 6 platinum
Items carried: Potion Extra Healing (3); Ring of Fire Resistance; Shield +1;
  Plate Mail +2; Javelin of Lightning; Long Sword +2
Experience for defeating: 600 + 12 per hit point (1800) + 48 for money (1848) +
  4000 for items (5848)

#051 6TH LVL THIEF   Chaotic Neutral Human Thief
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Thief 7
Hit Points:  28  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 12
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    18      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 10)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Thief skills: Pick Pocket 70%; Open Locks 67%; Find/Remove Traps 55%; Move
  Silently 65%; Hide in Shadows 53%; Hear Noise 25%; Climb Walls 94%
Money carried: 6 gold
Items carried: Leather Armor; Long Sword
Experience for defeating: 225 + 8 per hit point (449) + 6 for money (455)

#053 AIDES           Lawful Evil Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   3  Character Levels    : Fighter 3
Hit Points:  18  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     16      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    14      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  18  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+1 damage
Money carried: 5 silver
Items carried: Arrow (20); Long Bow; Chain Mail; Long Sword
Experience for defeating: 35 + 3 per hit point (89)

#054 CORPORAL        Lawful Evil Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   2  Character Levels    : Fighter 2
Hit Points:  13  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     16      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    14      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 8)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Money carried: 1 silver
Experience for defeating: 20 + 2 per hit point (46)

#055 HILL GIANT      Chaotic Evil Giant Fighter
Hit Dice  :   9  Character Levels    : Fighter 9
Hit Points:  41  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     19      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  8
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             9
Dexterity     0      Petrification or Polymorph     10
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   9
Charisma     10      Spell                          11
THAC0:  12  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 2d8 damage
Special Abilities: #120 boulder evasion (50% chance of avoiding thrown
  boulders)
Money carried: 2 copper; 4 silver; 3 electrum; 2000 gold
Items carried: Boulder; Boulder
Experience for defeating: 1400 + 12 per hit point (1892) + 2001 for money
  (3893)
Footnote: Boulders may be thrown for 1d8+8 damage.

#056 FIRE GIANT      Lawful Evil Giant Fighter
Hit Dice  :  12  Character Levels    : Fighter 12
Hit Points:  59  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     22      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  7
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             8
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   8
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:   9  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Physical attack: 1 for 5d6 damage
Special Abilities: #120 boulder evasion (50% chance of avoiding thrown
  boulders); #112 immunity to fire
Money carried: 2000 copper; 1000 silver; 4000 gold
Experience for defeating: 2700 + 16 per hit point (3644) + 4060 for money
  (7704)

#057 LIZARDMAN       True Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   3  Character Levels    : Fighter 3
Hit Points:  11  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  16  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Primary physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Secondary physical attack: 2 for 1d2 damage
Experience for defeating: 65 + 3 per hit point (98)

#058 MUTANT LIZ-MAN  True Neutral Reptile Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  18  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  14  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Primary physical attack: 1 for 1d10 damage
Secondary physical attack: 2 for 1d4 damage
Experience for defeating: 60 + 4 per hit point (132)

#059 GIANT LIZARD    True Neutral Reptile Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  16  Movement:  15   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  16  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Experience for defeating: 60 + 4 per hit point (124)

#060 GIANT SNAKE     True Neutral Snake Fighter
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Fighter 5
Hit Points:  25  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 3d6+2 damage
Special Abilities: #64 save vs. poison on melee hit or die
Experience for defeating: 135 + 5 per hit point (260)

#061 STIRGE          True Neutral Avian Fighter
Hit Dice  :   2  Character Levels    : Fighter 2
Hit Points:   5  Movement:  18   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 8 (from behind: 10)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d3 damage
Special Abilities: #76 blood draining attachment (on melee hit immobilizes
  victim; 1d4 damage per round until 12 damage done)
Experience for defeating: 36 + 2 per hit point (46)

#062 MINOTAUR        Chaotic Evil Generic Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Fighter 7
Hit Points:  33  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     18(50)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 8)
Primary physical attack: 1 for 1d3 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 2d4 damage
Experience for defeating: 400 + 8 per hit point (664)

#063 BUGBEAR         Chaotic Evil Monstrous Humanoid Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  16  Movement:   9   Size: Large or larger (small icon)
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  16  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 2d4 damage
Money carried: 24 copper; 18 silver
Experience for defeating: 135 + 4 per hit point (199) + 1 for money (200)

#065 AHNKHEG         True Neutral Insect Fighter
Hit Dice  :   8  Character Levels    : Fighter 8
Hit Points:  40  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  12
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  12  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 3d6 damage
Special Abilities: #80 1d4 additional acid damage on melee hit; #121 acid
  squirt attack (25% chance of happening, range 3, 8d4 damage, save vs. breath
  weapon for half damage)
Experience for defeating: 390 + 1 per hit point (430)
Differences from tabletop: acid squirt doesn't actually do acid damage

#066 TYRANITHRAXUS   Lawful Good Dragon Fighter
Hit Dice  :  10  Character Levels    : Fighter 10
Hit Points:  80  Movement:  24   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  7
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             8
Dexterity    19      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   8
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:   5  Armor Class: -4 (from behind: 2)
Primary physical attack: 2 for 1d6 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 4d6 damage
Special Abilities: #24 see invisibility; #106 85% magic resistance; #79 2d10
  additional fire damage on melee hit; #81 dragon fear aura (opponents with 3
  or fewer HD must save vs. magic or be paralyzed indefinitely, with 4-5 HD
  must save vs. magic or be cursed indefinitely); #89 displaced (first physical
  attack always misses); #88 electrical breath attack (length 10, 100% chance
  in first round, 50% chance thereafter, maximum 3 shots; area of effect as
  lightning bolt, max HP damage, save vs. breath weapon for half damage)
Experience for defeating: 2550 + 14 per hit point (3670)
Differences from tabletop: lacks repulsion breath

#067 CENTAUR         Chaotic Good Quadruped Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  20  Movement:  18   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 2 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 6 gold; 2 gems
Experience for defeating: 85 + 4 per hit point (165) + 506 for money (671)

#068 DISPLACER BEAST Lawful Good Generic Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Fighter 6
Hit Points:  30  Movement:  15   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  9
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            10
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     11
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  11
Charisma     10      Spell                          12
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 2 for 2d4 damage
Experience for defeating: 475 + 8 per hit point (715)
Differences from tabletop: not displaced

#069 DRIDER          Chaotic Evil Insect Fighter/Magic-User/Thief
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Fighter 7; Magic-User 7
Hit Points:  36  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 5)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4 damage
Special Abilities: #69 save vs. paralyzation on melee hit or be paralyzed for
  10+1d9 minutes (saving throw penalty does not work)
Spells memorized: M1 Magic Missile; M1 Sleep (2); M2 Detect Invisibility; M2
  Ray of Enfeeblement; M2 Stinking Cloud; M3 Blink; M3 Fireball (2); M3 Haste
Money carried: 7 platinum; 3 gems
Items carried: Shield; Arrow (4); Composite Long Bow
Experience for defeating: 875 + 8 per hit point (1163) + 785 for money (1948)
Differences from tabletop: lacks 15% magic resistance

#070 EFREETI         True Neutral Extra-Dimensional Fighter
Hit Dice  :  10  Character Levels    : Fighter 10
Hit Points:  55  Movement:  24   Size: Large or larger
Strength     19      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  8
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             9
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   9
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:  10  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 3d8 damage
Special Abilities: #113 efreeti fire resistance (-1 damage per die of fire
  damage)
Money carried: 6 gold
Experience for defeating: 1950 + 14 per hit point (2720) + 6 for money (2726)
Differences from tabletop: lacks Enlarge and Invisibility spells

#071 ETTIN           Chaotic Evil Monstrous Humanoid Fighter
Hit Dice  :  10  Character Levels    : Fighter 10
Hit Points:  50  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     19      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  8
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             9
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     10
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   9
Charisma     10      Spell                          11
THAC0:  10  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Primary physical attack: 1 for 2d8 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 3d6 damage
Experience for defeating: 1950 + 14 per hit point (2650)

#072 GHOUL           Chaotic Evil Undead Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Ghoul
Hit Dice  :   2  Character Levels    : Fighter 2
Hit Points:  10  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  16  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 8)
Primary physical attack: 2 for 1d3 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Special Abilities: #108 immunity to sleep and charm spells; #68 save vs.
  paralyzation on melee hit or be paralyzed for 63 minutes (does not affect
  elves)
Experience for defeating: 65 + 2 per hit point (85)

#073 GNOLL           Chaotic Evil Monstrous Humanoid Fighter
Hit Dice  :   2  Character Levels    : Fighter 2
Hit Points:  10  Movement:   9   Size: Large or larger (reversed)
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  16  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 2d4 damage
Money carried: 12 electrum; 8 gold
Experience for defeating: 28 + 2 per hit point (48) + 14 for money (62)
Differences from tabletop: marked as Small/Medium in game files, though still
  has a Large icon

#074 GIANT MANTIS    True Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :  10  Character Levels    : Fighter 10
Hit Points:  55  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  8
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             9
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   9
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:  10  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Physical attack: 1 for 2d6 damage
Special Abilities: #77 bite and hold attack (defender below Strength 19
  immobilized until 3d4 melee attack next round)
Experience for defeating: 1350 + 14 per hit point (2120)

#075 6TH LVL FIGHTER True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Fighter 6
Hit Points:  45  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 12      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     14      Spell                          14
THAC0:  12  Armor Class: 1 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+2 damage
Money carried: 15 copper
Items carried: Shield; Plate Armor; Long Sword +1
Experience for defeating: 150 + 6 per hit point (420) + 400 for items (820)

#076 7TH LVL DW FIGH True Neutral Dwarf Fighter
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Fighter 7
Hit Points:  50  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 12      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  12
Charisma     14      Spell                          13
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 2d4+2 damage
Money carried: 3 gold
Items carried: Lucern Hammer +1
Experience for defeating: 225 + 8 per hit point (625) + 3 for money (628) + 400
  for items (1028)
Differences from tabletop: lacks dwarf AC/THAC0 bonuses

#077 7TH LVL THIEF   Chaotic Neutral Human Thief
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Thief 7
Hit Points:  28  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 12
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    18      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 10)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Thief skills: Pick Pocket 70%; Open Locks 67%; Find/Remove Traps 55%; Move
  Silently 65%; Hide in Shadows 53%; Hear Noise 25%; Climb Walls 94%
Money carried: 6 gold
Items carried: Leather Armor; Wand of Magic Missiles (23 charges)
Experience for defeating: 225 + 8 per hit point (449) + 6 for money (455) +
  4000 for items (4455)

#078 2ND LVL CLERIC  Neutral Good Monster Cleric
Hit Dice  :   2  Character Levels    : Cleric 2
Hit Points:   8  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            13
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     14
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          15
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 10 (from behind: 12)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4 damage
Money carried: 4 silver
Experience for defeating: 20 + 2 per hit point (36)

#079 DIANE           True Neutral Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Magic-User 5
Hit Points:  20  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 15      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            13
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     11
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          12
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 9 (from behind: 11)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4 damage
Spells memorized: M1 Magic Missile (7)
Money carried: 20 copper
Items carried: Dagger
Experience for defeating: 90 + 5 per hit point (190)

#080 7TH LVL FIGHTER True Neutral Dwarf Fighter
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Fighter 7
Hit Points:  50  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 12      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  12
Charisma     14      Spell                          13
THAC0:  14  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d10+1 damage
Money carried: 3 gold
Items carried: Plate Armor; Two-Handed Sword
Experience for defeating: 225 + 8 per hit point (625) + 3 for money (628)

#081 YARASH          Lawful Evil Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   9  Character Levels    : Magic-User 9
Hit Points:  27  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 18      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4+2 damage
Spells memorized: M1 Magic Missile (3); M1 Shield; M2 Mirror Image; M2 Stinking
  Cloud (2); M3 Blink; M3 Fireball; M3 Protection from Normal Missiles
Money carried: 8 platinum
Items carried: Potion of Speed; Wand of Paralyzation (23 charges); Potion of
  Healing (2); Bracers AC 4
Experience for defeating: 600 + 12 per hit point (924) + 40 for money (964) +
  4000 for items (4964)

#082 LEVEL 6 MU      True Neutral Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Magic-User 6
Hit Points:  23  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 15      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:  17  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 8)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4+2 damage
Spells memorized: M1 Magic Missile (2); M1 Sleep (2); M2 Mirror Image; M2
  Stinking Cloud; M3 Fireball (2)
Money carried: 20 copper; 15 silver
Items carried: Magic-User Scroll (Fireball, Blink, Blink); Dagger +2; Ring of
  Protection +3; Cloak of Displacement; Wand of Lightning (67 charges)
Experience for defeating: 150 + 6 per hit point (288) + 9600 for items (9888)
Footnote: This monster does not actually appear anywhere.

#083 7TH LVL CLERIC  Lawful Evil Human Cleric
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Cleric 7
Hit Points:  42  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     15      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  7
Wisdom       18      Rod, Staff, or Wand            10
Dexterity    14      Petrification or Polymorph     11
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          12
THAC0:  14  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+3 damage
Spells memorized: C1 Curse (4); C2 Hold Person (3); C2 Silence, 15' Radius; C3
  Prayer; C3 Bestow Curse (2)
Money carried: 15 gold
Items carried: Potion of Healing; Banded Armor +2; Mace +2
Experience for defeating: 350 + 8 per hit point (686) + 15 for money (701) +
  2000 for items (2701)

#084 6TH LVL FIGHTER True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Fighter 6
Hit Points:  45  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 12      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     14      Spell                          14
THAC0:  11  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d10+3 damage
Money carried: 15 copper
Items carried: Javelin of Lightning; Two-Handed Sword +2; Chain Mail +1
Experience for defeating: 150 + 6 per hit point (420) + 1600 for items (2020)

#085 8TH LVL FIGHTER True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   8  Character Levels    : Fighter 8
Hit Points:  87  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(51)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 12      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 18      Breath Weapon                  12
Charisma     14      Spell                          13
THAC0:  12  Armor Class: 1 (from behind: 3)
Physical attack: 1.5 for 1d10+5 damage
Money carried: 5 platinum
Items carried: Ring of Protection +3; Two-Handed Sword +2; Plate Mail +2
Experience for defeating: 500 + 10 per hit point (1370) + 25 for money (1395) +
  2800 for items (4195)

#086 AL-HYAM DAZID   Lawful Evil Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Magic-User 7
Hit Points:  22  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 18      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4+2 damage
Spells memorized: M1 Reduce; M1 Magic Missile (2); M1 Shield; M2 Mirror Image;
  M2 Stinking Cloud; M3 Fireball (2)
Money carried: 15 gold
Items carried: Wand of Lightning (20 charges); Ring of Fire Resistance; Bracers
  AC 3
Experience for defeating: 350 + 8 per hit point (526) + 15 for money (541) +
  8000 for items (8541)

#087 ENVOY           True Neutral Human Cleric/Fighter/Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Fighter 6; Magic-User 6
Hit Points:  45  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(51)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 18      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     11
Constitution 17      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     14      Spell                          12
THAC0:  11  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d10+5 damage
Spells memorized: M1 Magic Missile (2); M1 Sleep (2); M2 Mirror Image; M2
  Stinking Cloud; M3 Fireball
Money carried: 5 gold
Items carried: Two-Handed Sword +2; Plate
Experience for defeating: 225 + 6 per hit point (495) + 5 for money (500) + 800
  for items (1300)

#088 GENHEERIS       Lawful Evil Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Magic-User 7
Hit Points:  22  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 18      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 9 (from behind: 11)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4+2 damage
Spells known: M1 Burning Hands; M1 Charm Person; M1 Magic Missile; M1 Shield;
  M1 Sleep; M2 Invisibility; M2 Mirror Image; M2 Ray of Enfeeblement; M2
  Stinking Cloud; M3 Fireball; M3 Haste; M3 Lightning Bolt; M3 Protection from
  Normal Missiles
Spells memorized: M1 Magic Missile (3); M1 Sleep; M2 Stinking Cloud (2); M3
  Fireball (2)
Money carried: 15 gold
Items carried: Wand of Lightning (56 charges)
Experience for defeating: 350 + 8 per hit point (526) + 15 for money (541) +
  4000 for items (4541)
Footnote: Cannot actually memorize spells.

#089 5TH LVL MU      True Neutral Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Magic-User 5
Hit Points:  20  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 15      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            13
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     11
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          12
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 9 (from behind: 11)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4 damage
Spells memorized: M1 Charm Person (2); M1 Magic Missile (2); M2 Mirror Image;
  M2 Stinking Cloud; M3 Hold Person
Money carried: 20 copper
Items carried: Dagger
Experience for defeating: 90 + 5 per hit point (190)

#090 1ST LVL CLERIC  Neutral Good Monster Cleric
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Cleric 1
Hit Points:   8  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            13
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     14
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          15
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+1 damage
Spells memorized: C1 Bless; C1 Detect Magic; M1 Reduce
Money carried: 4 silver
Items carried: Mace; Chain Mail
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (18)

#091 LEVEL 5 CLERIC  Neutral Good Monster Cleric
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Cleric 5
Hit Points:  29  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     14      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  9
Wisdom       18      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+4 damage
Spells memorized: C1 Bless (2); C1 Cure Light Wounds (3); C2 Hold Person (5);
  C3 Cause Blindness
Money carried: 4 silver
Items carried: Necklace of Missiles (6 charges); Mace +3; Plate Mail +1
Experience for defeating: 130 + 5 per hit point (275) + 2400 for items (2675)

#092 TYRANITHRAXUS   Chaotic Neutral Human Thief
Hit Dice  :   8  Character Levels    : Thief 8
Hit Points:  40  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 12
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    18      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  14  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+6 damage
Thief skills: Pick Pocket 75%; Open Locks 72%; Find/Remove Traps 60%; Move
  Silently 72%; Hide in Shadows 59%; Hear Noise 25%; Climb Walls 96%; Read
  Languages 40%
Money carried: 4 gold
Items carried: Gauntlets of Ogre Power; Ring of Protection +3; Long Sword +5
Experience for defeating: 375 + 8 per hit point (695) + 4 for money (699) +
  4400 for items (5099)

#093 6TH LVL THIEF   Chaotic Neutral Human Thief
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Thief 7
Hit Points:  28  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 12
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    18      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 12)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Special Abilities: #72 camouflaged (invisibility 95% of the time)
Thief skills: Pick Pocket 70%; Open Locks 67%; Find/Remove Traps 55%; Move
  Silently 65%; Hide in Shadows 53%; Hear Noise 25%; Climb Walls 94%
Money carried: 6 gold
Experience for defeating: 225 + 8 per hit point (449) + 6 for money (455)

#094 LEVEL 3 MU      True Neutral Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   3  Character Levels    : Magic-User 3
Hit Points:   9  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 15      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            13
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     11
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          12
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 9 (from behind: 11)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4+2 damage
Spells memorized: M1 Magic Missile; M1 Sleep; M2 Stinking Cloud
Money carried: 20 copper
Items carried: Wand of Magic Missiles (67 charges)
Experience for defeating: 50 + 3 per hit point (77) + 4000 for items (4077)

#095 DRYTHH          True Neutral Reptile Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  18  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(00)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  14  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Primary physical attack: 1 for 1d10 damage
Secondary physical attack: 2 for 1d4 damage
Experience for defeating: 60 + 4 per hit point (132)

#096 GUARD           True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   4  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     16      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    14      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 8 (from behind: 10)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+1 damage
Money carried: 5 copper
Items carried: Long Sword; Leather Armor; Quarrel; Light Crossbow
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (14)

#097 BANDIT          True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   6  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 8)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 15 copper
Items carried: Arrow (20); Long Bow; Short Sword; Shield; Leather Armor
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (16)

#098 MERCHANT        True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   6  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 8)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 15 copper
Items carried: Arrow (20); Long Bow; Short Sword; Shield; Leather Armor
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (16)

#099 BUCCANEER       True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   4  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     16      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    14      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 10 (from behind: 12)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Money carried: 5 copper
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (14)

#100 3RD LVL FIGHTER Lawful Evil Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   3  Character Levels    : Fighter 3
Hit Points:  18  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     16      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    14      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  18  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+1 damage
Money carried: 5 silver
Items carried: Long Sword; Plate Armor; Quarrel (15); Heavy Crossbow
Experience for defeating: 35 + 3 per hit point (89)

#101 5TH LVL FIGHTER True Neutral Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Fighter 5
Hit Points:  39  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    15      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  16  Armor Class: 9 (from behind: 12)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8 damage
Money carried: 5 copper; 2 silver
Experience for defeating: 90 + 5 per hit point (285)

#102 CAPTAIN         Lawful Evil Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :  10  Character Levels    : Fighter 10
Hit Points: 110  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(51)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  8
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             9
Dexterity    17      Petrification or Polymorph     10
Constitution 17      Breath Weapon                   9
Charisma     14      Spell                          11
THAC0:   8  Armor Class: -6 (from behind: 2)
Physical attack: 1.5 for 1d8+7 damage
Money carried: 18 gold; 6 platinum
Items carried: Shield +2; Long Sword +4; Plate Mail +3; Quarrel (15); Light
  Crossbow
Experience for defeating: 900 + 14 per hit point (2440) + 48 for money (2488) +
  3600 for items (6088)

#103 WARRIOR         Lawful Evil Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   2  Character Levels    : Fighter 2
Hit Points:  13  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     16      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            15
Dexterity    14      Petrification or Polymorph     16
Constitution 14      Breath Weapon                  17
Charisma     10      Spell                          17
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 6)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d8+1 damage
Money carried: 1 silver
Items carried: Shield; Long Bow; Arrow (60); Silver Battle Axe; Banded Mail
Experience for defeating: 20 + 2 per hit point (46)

#104 PRINCESS FATIMA Lawful Good Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  33  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(01)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    18      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 16      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     15      Spell                          16
THAC0:  16  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 10)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+3 damage
Items carried: Shield; Leather Armor; Short Sword
Experience for defeating: 90 + 5 per hit point (255)

#105 VAMPIRE         Chaotic Evil Undead Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Vampire
Hit Dice  :   9  Character Levels    : Fighter 9
Hit Points:  15  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(76)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  8
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             9
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     10
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   9
Charisma     10      Spell                          11
THAC0:  14  Armor Class: 1 (from behind: 3)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+4 damage
Special Abilities: #118 half damage from cold; #117 vulnerability to holy
  water; #114 half damage from electricity; #84 charming gaze (free Charm
  Person every round; -2 penalty to save); #125 immunity to sleep, charm,
  paralysis, and poison; #119 immunity to non-magical weapons; #126
  suppressible gaze attack (by equipped mirrors or lawful good holy symbols);
  #98 regenerate 3 hit points per round; #86 melee level-draining attack (2
  levels)
Experience for defeating: 3800 + 12 per hit point (3980)

#106 WOLF            True Neutral Quadruped Fighter
Hit Dice  :   3  Character Levels    : Fighter 3
Hit Points:  18  Movement:  18   Size: Large or larger (reversed)
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  16  Armor Class: 7 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4+1 damage
Experience for defeating: 35 + 3 per hit point (89)

#107 DIRTEN          Lawful Good Human Cleric
Hit Dice  :   5  Character Levels    : Cleric 5
Hit Points:  26  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 15      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  9
Wisdom       16      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution  9      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     15      Spell                          14
THAC0:  18  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+1 damage
Spells known: All Cleric level 1 spells; All Cleric level 2 spells; All Cleric
  level 3 spells
Spells memorized: C1 Bless (2); C1 Cure Light Wounds (3); C2 Find Traps; C2
  Hold Person (2); C2 Slow Poison; C2 Spiritual Hammer; C3 Prayer
Money carried: 20 copper
Items carried: Wooden Holy Symbol; Mace; Chain Mail
Experience for defeating: 150 + 6 per hit point (306)

#108 ACOLYTE         Neutral Good Monster Cleric
Hit Dice  :   1  Character Levels    : Cleric 1
Hit Points:   8  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            13
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     14
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          15
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 4 (from behind: 7)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+1 damage
Spells known: All Cleric level 1 spells
Spells memorized: C1 Bless; C1 Cure Light Wounds; C1 Detect Magic
Money carried: 4 silver
Items carried: Silver Holy Symbol of Sune; Holy Water Vial; Shield; Mace; Chain
  Mail
Experience for defeating: 10 + 1 per hit point (18)

#109 HERO            Lawful Evil Human Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  35  Movement:   9   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     17      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 14      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       14      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    17      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 17      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  14  Armor Class: -1 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d10+2 damage
Money carried: 5 silver
Items carried: Long Bow; Arrow (60); Two-Handed Sword +1; Plate Mail +1
Experience for defeating: 60 + 4 per hit point (200) + 800 for items (1000)

#110 THEURGIST       True Neutral Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Magic-User 4
Hit Points:  13  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 15      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            13
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     11
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     10      Spell                          12
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 8 (from behind: 10)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4 damage
Spells known: M1 Magic Missile; M1 Read Magic; M1 Sleep; M2 Knock; M2 Stinking
  Cloud
Spells memorized: M1 Read Magic; M1 Sleep (2); M2 Knock; M2 Stinking Cloud
Money carried: 20 copper
Items carried: Dart (6); Dagger; Ring of Protection +1
Experience for defeating: 75 + 4 per hit point (127) + 400 for items (527)

#111 ROBBER          Chaotic Neutral Human Thief
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Thief 4
Hit Points:  16  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    18      Petrification or Polymorph     14
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          15
THAC0:  19  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+1 damage
Thief skills: Pick Pocket 55%; Open Locks 62%; Find/Remove Traps 40%; Move
  Silently 43%; Hide in Shadows 35%; Hear Noise 15%; Climb Walls 88%
Money carried: 5 silver
Items carried: Leather Armor +1; Short Sword +1
Experience for defeating: 90 + 5 per hit point (170) + 800 for items (970)

#112 CURATE          Lawful Good Human Cleric
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Cleric 4
Hit Points:  26  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 15      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  9
Wisdom       16      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution  9      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     15      Spell                          14
THAC0:  18  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6+1 damage
Spells known: All Cleric level 1 spells; All Cleric level 2 spells
Spells memorized: C1 Bless (2); C1 Cure Light Wounds (3); C2 Hold Person (2);
  C2 Slow Poison; C2 Spiritual Hammer
Money carried: 20 copper
Items carried: Mace; Plate Mail
Experience for defeating: 90 + 5 per hit point (220)

#113 HIPPOGRIFF      True Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4
Hit Points:  18  Movement:  36   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Primary physical attack: 2 for 1d6 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 1d10 damage
Experience for defeating: 60 + 4 per hit point (132)

#114 MUMMY           Lawful Evil Undead Fighter
Clerics turn using this line on table: Mummy
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Fighter 7
Hit Points:  33  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     18(51)  Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d12 damage
Special Abilities: #117 vulnerability to holy water; #122 mummy vulnerability
  to fire (magic or fire does +1 damage per die; 3d8 damage from flasks of
  oil); #110 immunity to cold; #125 immunity to sleep, charm, paralysis, and
  poison; #119 immunity to non-magical weapons; #116 half damage from magical
  weapons; #87 melee mummy rot attack; #82 mummy fear aura (at start of combat,
  all opponents must save or be paralyzed for 1d4 minutes, +1 bonus with party
  of 6+, humans save with a +2 bonus); vulnerability to electricity (sometimes)
Experience for defeating: 1150 + 8 per hit point (1414)

#116 PHASE SPIDER    True Neutral Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   6
Hit Points:  35  Movement:   6   Size: Large or larger (reversed)
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 7 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Special Abilities: #37 blinking; #70 save vs. poison at a -2 penalty on melee
  hit or die
Experience for defeating: 700 + 6 per hit point (910)

#118 THRI-KREEN      Chaotic Neutral Insect Fighter
Hit Dice  :   7  Character Levels    : Fighter 7
Hit Points:  33  Movement:  18   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 10
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            11
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     12
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  12
Charisma     10      Spell                          13
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 5 (from behind: 7)
Primary physical attack: 4 for 1d4 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 1d4+1 damage
Special Abilities: #104 missile evasion (60% chance of avoiding any missile
  attack); #67 save vs. paralyzation on melee hit or be paralyzed for 2d8
  minutes
Money carried: 3 gems
Experience for defeating: 800 + 8 per hit point (1064) + 750 for money (1814)
Footnote: Designed by Paul Reiche III, better known for Star Control II.

#119 TIGER           True Neutral Quadruped Fighter
Hit Dice  :   6  Character Levels    : Fighter 6
Hit Points:  38  Movement:  12   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 11
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            12
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     13
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  13
Charisma     10      Spell                          14
THAC0:  13  Armor Class: 6 (from behind: 8)
Primary physical attack: 2 for 1d4+1 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 1d10 damage
Special Abilities: #73 rear claw rake (2 additional 2d4 attacks if 2 melee
  attacks hit)
Experience for defeating: 225 + 6 per hit point (453)

#120 WILD BOAR       True Neutral Quadruped Fighter
Hit Dice  :   4  Character Levels    : Fighter 4
Hit Points:  18  Movement:  15   Size: Large or larger (reversed)
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  3      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 13
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            14
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     15
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  16
Charisma     10      Spell                          16
THAC0:  15  Armor Class: 7 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 3d4 damage
Special Abilities: #99 can continue to fight for 1d4+1 additional rounds after
  being reduced to 0 to -6 hit points
Experience for defeating: 85 + 4 per hit point (157)

#121 WYVERN          Neutral Evil Generic Monster Fighter
Hit Dice  :   9  Character Levels    : Fighter 9
Hit Points:  42  Movement:  24   Size: Large or larger
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  8
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             9
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     10
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   9
Charisma     10      Spell                          11
THAC0:  12  Armor Class: 3 (from behind: 5)
Primary physical attack: 1 for 2d8 damage
Secondary physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Special Abilities: #64 save vs. poison on melee hit or die
Experience for defeating: 925 + 10 per hit point (1345)

#122 EVOKER          True Neutral Human Magic-User
Hit Dice  :   2  Character Levels    : Magic-User 2
Hit Points:   6  Movement:  12   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 15      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 14
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            13
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     11
Constitution  9      Breath Weapon                  15
Charisma     15      Spell                          12
THAC0:  20  Armor Class: 9 (from behind: 11)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d4 damage
Spells known: M1 Magic Missile; M1 Read Magic; M1 Sleep
Spells memorized: M1 Sleep (2)
Money carried: 20 copper
Items carried: Dart (6); Dagger
Experience for defeating: 35 + 3 per hit point (53)

#123 KOBOLD          Lawful Evil Monstrous Humanoid Fighter
Hit Dice  :   0
Hit Points:   3  Movement:   6   Size: Small/Medium
Strength     10      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence  6      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death 16
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand            17
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph     18
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                  20
Charisma     10      Spell                          19
THAC0:  21  Armor Class: 7 (from behind: 9)
Physical attack: 1 for 1d6 damage
Money carried: 16 copper
Items carried: Arrow (30); Short Bow; Short Sword
Experience for defeating: 5 + 1 per hit point (8)

#124 EFREETI         True Neutral Extra-Dimensional Fighter
Hit Dice  :  10  Character Levels    : Fighter 10
Hit Points:  55  Movement:  24   Size: Large or larger
Strength     19      Base saving throws versus:
Intelligence 10      Paralyzation, Poison, or Death  8
Wisdom       10      Rod, Staff, or Wand             9
Dexterity    10      Petrification or Polymorph      9
Constitution 10      Breath Weapon                   9
Charisma     10      Spell                          10
THAC0:  10  Armor Class: 2 (from behind: 4)
Physical attack: 1 for 3d8 damage
Special Abilities: #113 efreeti fire resistance (-1 damage per die of fire
  damage)
Money carried: 6 gold
Experience for defeating: 1950 + 14 per hit point (2720) + 6 for money (2726)
Differences from tabletop: lacks Enlarge and Invisibility spells


SECTION 11.1 - Cheat Mode
-------------------------

To begin the game in cheat mode, start the game with using the executable
option STING, which must be all capitalized.  That means invoking the game with
"start STING" (or "st STING" if you have that version), or editing any batch
file to say that.

This activates the following keys:
Ctrl-C: immediately quit to DOS (this command does exist in later games)
Ctrl-D: toggle hit point debugging (displays debugging upon a level drain)
Alt-X: immediately win a combat
J: (in a training hall) train for free

It also completely bypasses both the introduction and the copy protection.

SECTION 11.2 - Raising the Dead with Targeted Damage Spells
-----------------------------------------------------------

A dead character is a valid target in combat for a targeted spell that can
inflict damage.  A dead character has 0 hit points, and if the spell does fewer
than 10 points of damage, the dead character will now just be dying, and can
then be bandaged and cured as normal.

Burning Hands always works for this in Pool of Radiance.  Cause Light Wounds
can also work, but requires an attack roll to work.

This bug is still present in Curse of the Azure Bonds, but gone in Secret of
the Silver Blades.

SECTION 11.3 - Duplicating Items
--------------------------------

This interface loophole allows you to duplicate any item you own without using
a save game editor.  To do so, perform the following steps (back up your saved
game directory before doing this; it is easy to screw up):

   1. Go to a training hall.  (In later games you can do this outside a
      training hall.)
   2. "R"emove one character from the party.
   3. "S"ave the game.
   4. Create a dummy character.
   5. Trade all the items to be duplicated to the dummy character.
   6. "R"emove the dummy character from the party.
   7. "D"rop all other characters.
   8. "L"oad the saved game from step 3 or 11b.
   9. "A"dd the dummy character to the party.
  10. You should now have two copies of the desired items; transfer them to
      your real characters.
  11. If you want more copies:
      a. "R"emove the dummy character from the party.
      b. "S"ave the game.
      c. "A"dd the dummy character back to the party.
      d. Go back to step 5.
  12. Once done, discard the dummy character and re-add the removed real
      character.

SECTION 11.4 - Abusing Abnormal Constitution
--------------------------------------------

You can abuse out-of-range Constituion, with a score of either 22 or 0, which
you can get by:
* Finding the Manual of Bodily Health in Mendor's Library, and get many copies
  by restarting the game repeatedly, or duplicating it.  Use them one at a time
  to raise Constitution to exactly 22.
* Draining a character to Constitution 0 by repeatedly dying and having a
  temple cast Raise Dead.

You then get an abnormally high number of hit points per level: +7 or +5 at
Constitution 22, or +8 at Constitution 0.  You can "M"odify a character with 0
XP for more hit points if you really want to get the most out of this.

Other abnormal Constitution scores either will not work or have undesirable
effects.

You do not get to keep a Constitution of 22 in later games (if you directly
transfer to Curse of the Azure Bonds), but you do keep any hit points (unless
you transfer to Hillsfar).  If you abuse a Constitution of 0, that will not
behave well in later games; raise it before leaving Pool of Radiance.  Be aware
of the limit of 255 hit points -- that always exists even in later games.


SECTION 12.1.1 - Useful Hacking Utilities and References
--------------------------------------------------------

Gold Box Companion is not just useful for playing the game; it now includes
numerous utilities useful for hacking.
http://gbc.zorbus.net/

DAXDump and ECLDump can be used to unpack the *.DAX files.  You may download
it from:
http://gbc.zorbus.net/daxdump.zip

Gold Box Explorer will allow you to investigate the contests of *.DAX and
*.ECL files.  Its project page is at:
https://github.com/bsimser/Gold-Box-Explorer
The Curse of the Azure Bonds remake is for the sequel, but it was helpful for
figuring out Gold Box-specific mechanics:
http://simeonpilgrim.com/blog/2008/07/22/curse-of-the-azure-bonds-build-1013/

The executable is partially compressed.  You can use UNP to decompress it
(which should not interfere with playing the game), site requires using the
Internet Archive:
http://unp.bencastricum.nl/

To disassemble the executables, IDA Pro v5 Free works well:
https://downloads.scummvm.org/frs/extras/IDA/idafree50.exe
Ghidra might be the superior tool someday, but among other problems it cannot
natively handle DOS overlays, which is a deal-killer for the Gold Box games.
IDA Pro v6.* works significantly better, if you can get your hands on it; the
manufacturer no longer sells or supports it, and v7+ won't work for DOS
analysis.  IDA Pro v6.* adds support for pointers in structs and improves
__usercall but still does not truly understand Turbo Pascal, and you still
can't do some things like define an array of function pointers, or specify
a parameter in 3 separate registers (both of which happen in the Gold Box
games).

x86 assembly reference:
https://c9x.me/x86/

x86 interrupt reference:
https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~ralf/files.html

DOS memory map:
https://www.osdata.com/system/physical/memmap.htm
https://www.osdata.com/system/physical/lowmem.htm

TPv6PG refers to the Turbo Pascal v6 Programmer's Guide.
TPv6LR refers to the Turbo Pascal v6 Library Reference.

SECTION 12.1.2 - Program Overview
---------------------------------

Pool of Radiance is written in Pascal.  One way to eliminate most possible
languages is to inspect human-readable strings in the executable related to
normal program function: standard Pascal strings begin with the length of the
string, but C strings do not and are always null-terminated.  (You cannot use
fatal error messages or DOS interrupt calls for this purpose.  This assumes the
strings were placed by the compiler -- all bets are off if a programmer did so
manually, which does happen here sometimes.)

SSI used Turbo Pascal for the Gold Box games -- you can confirm by comparing
library functions written in machine code with the Turbo Pascal compiler.  Pool
of Radiance v1.0 must have been written in Turbo Pascal v4; v3 doesn't support
unsigned 16-bit integers and produces rather bloated COM files instead of EXE
files (COM is normally what you want for a slim executable, but not in this
case), and v5 didn't yet exist.  Pool of Radiance v1.3 was compiled with the
later version of Turbo Pascal v6; there were two different releases of v6, and
the one SSI used is dated 1991.  (If you thought present-day versioning is
stupid ... the 1980s and 1990s were much worse.)

This long ago, games were typically written in whatever language the
programmers felt like; for instance, in 1980s DOS games SSI used:
* Gold Box games (before Dark Queen of Krynn): Turbo Pascal v4 to v6
* Phantasie I: non-Microsoft C of some kind
* Rings of Zilfin: Turbo Pascal v3
* Shard of Spring: Microsoft QuickBasic v3
* Star Command: Microsoft QuickBasic v2

Borland did not always put their own company name in every executable its
compilers produced; Pool of Radiance v1.3 does say Borland, but anything
compiled with Turbo Pascal v4/v5 will not unless the programmers make it so.
(Microsoft is more reliable about stamping their company name on everything.)

Quick reference on Turbo Pascal data types:
Array:
  * Indexing can work however a programmer pleases, so long as it is 16-bit;
    0-indexing and 1-indexing are both common; 2-indexing, 3-indexing, and
    9-indexing all exist here as well.
  * Multi-dimensional arrays are possible, but ordinarily must be rectangular;
    any "ragged" multi-dimensional array of the sort used in C++ or most modern
    programming languages would have to be micromanaged here.
  * Multi-dimensional arrays are row-major, same as C/C++.
  * An array does not undergo automatic decay to a pointer as in C; that must
    be specified by a programmer.
Boolean:
  * 0 is False, 1 is True.  Taken for granted today, but this standard wasn't
    standard back then; -1 for True was more common then than now.
  * Takes 1 byte, which may not be the case in other languages.
Byte: unsigned 8-bit integer (uint8).  (Not to be confused with a byte.)
Char: 8-bit character.
  * Can be either a Byte or a String of length 1.
  * It is assumed your code page (normally 437 in English, or 850 for other
    Western European languages) is a superset of standard ASCII, and that
    character 219 is a solid block.
  * Note that an 8-bit Byte is unsigned; a char is not necessarily unsigned in
    other programming languages.
dictionary or HashMap equivalent: Turbo Pascal never had this.
File: represents a DOS file handle, with extra information.
  * May be either text or not.
  * For File structure, see TPv6PG, p. 143.  Any strings in a File are C
    strings, not Pascal Strings.
  * A File takes 256 bytes if opened as text, 128 otherwise.
  * May never be passed by value; this is the only type in Turbo Pascal that
    must be passed by reference.
floating-point other than Real (Single, Double, Extended): Not used by Pool of
  Radiance.
Integer: signed 16-bit integer (int16).
Longint: signed 32-bit integer (int32).  There is no way to express your own
  unsigned 32-bit integer (uint32) in Turbo Pascal v4/v5/v6 without resorting
  to inline machine code or floating-point.
Object: C++ object equivalent.  SSI can't have used Objects; they didn't exist
  until Turbo Pascal v5.5.  v6 actually has much of the structure many modern
  programmers expect.
Pointer: pointers accessible to a Turbo Pascal programmer are always far
  pointers: 32-bit, with 21 bits of actual information.  Internally used
  pointers may be near pointers.
Real: 48-bit floating point; 8-bit exponent, 40-bit little-endian mantissa with
  most significant bit the sign.  Doesn't adhere to IEEE 754, as Real predates
  it.  48 bits is the largest an Intel 8088 can handle two of using only
  registers.  Actually used by the Gold Box games, which is not what most
  programmers even from the 1990s would expect.
Record: C struct equivalent.  The Turbo Pascal compiler is not allowed to
  reorder Record fields, same as C/C++ compilers.  In x86/x64 architecture,
  this helps serve as a simple serialization and deserialization mechanism, if
  you declare your Record/struct as packed; SSI took advantage of this.
Set: bitset with maximum of 256 bits; often occupies the maximum 32 bytes.
  Implemented with brute force, not hash tables (brute force is much faster at
  this small scale, especially on old hardware).
Shortint: signed 8-bit integer (int8).  (A C/C++ short is 16-bit or more.)
String:
  * First byte is string length, followed by string data; maximum length 255.
  * No null terminator is required.
  * Thus, chars are 1-indexed, not 0-indexed as in C/C++.
  * A stack variable that occupies precisely 256 bytes is typically a String.
    In the Gold Box games, this also applies to variables that take precisely
    41 bytes, as the screen width is 40 char.
  * Pascal strings are faster to handle than C strings, as you don't incur the
    cost of checking every byte to find the end of the string, but are
    otherwise more awkward for many many reasons.
  * Another major problem: Turbo Pascal by default passes strings by value,
    which means lots of code and time are occupied by repeated String copying.
  * Additionally awkward: SSI implements multiple additional kinds of strings,
    including C strings.  C string support was only added in Turbo Pascal v7;
    SSI had to roll their own C string code.
Word: unsigned 16-bit integer (uint16).

All numbers and addresses are little-endian unless otherwise specified;
exception: multi-register expressions (e.g., DX:AX) are big-endian.

Bytes are 8-bit unless otherwise specified.  Yes, this is one of those cases
where bytes are not necessarily 8-bit.  That's not unusual in games originally
written for 8-bit platforms then ported to a 16-bit platform.

The default convention is that integers are unsigned.  This is actually what
you generally want for a game on an 8-bit or 16-bit platform, especially in
Turbo Pascal.  Unlike Infocom or Microprose, SSI often adheres to that unless
it thinks it has good reason not to.  (I wouldn't do this for a non-game, or on
a 32-bit platform.)

The default base convention I use:
  Hexadecimal:
    1. addresses
       a. segments
       b. offsets
       c. GBVM addresses (addresses begin with $ if and only if they are GBVM)
    2. opcodes
    3. machine code bytes
  Decimal: everything else (even bit flags)

One other point that should be emphasized about Turbo Pascal: it compiles very
quickly and works more reliably compared to C, but as a trade-off is prone to
producing machine code that is bloated and sluggish; the continual copying of
Strings all over the place is the most prominent example of this.  That makes
Pascal a superior learning language and makes life easier as a programmer, but
if performance matters (which it does here, even with emulation on a modern
computer), you're essentially making life easier for yourself but harder for
the user.  If you programmed back in the day and wondered why teaching was done
in Pascal but actual coding was done in C, you now have some idea why.

Another point that I feel compelled to mention: most of what I've written
anywhere in this FAQ is the result of reverse engineering (roughly comparable
to what most biologists do -- that's my actual professional training).  It
works rather differently from the forward engineering that almost all software
engineers do.  The generally reasonable assumptions that software engineers
make often do *not* apply in reverse.

SECTION 12.1.3 - File Manifest
------------------------------

This is a list of files included with installed original v1.2 and v1.3.

* v1.0 and v1.1 are not listed because (1) I don't have original copies of
  those versions; (2) there are substantial differences between v1.1 and v1.2.
* Anything not listed is not necessary for gameplay; the main omissions are
  POOL.CFG (which varies with the settings you choose) and the default party.
* If no version difference is listed, the file is unchanged between v1.2 and
  v1.3.
* Timestamps are not listed.  It can be useful as a makeshift means of file ID,
  and occasionally an older game will use it for this purpose; but here as in
  many other such cases, the installation executable may set some timestamps
  itself, and the GOG release does not preserve it.  (Size still works as
  makeshift file ID; that's similar to using birthdate as a makeshift personal
  ID.)
* The given SHA-1 hash is an actual good means of file ID.

Filename         Size SHA-1 hash
8X8D1    DAX    9,711 6f5b091c98bdba1433d0d17fac36e3fad38c4664
8X8D2    DAX   12,190 57b6ae10cacea537847c607878dcd45a57d0b6ab
8X8D3    DAX   12,967 ff3c360bcca88b85bd3fc2cad4fc5dae5a9c208d
8X8D4    DAX   14,343 2cb6820322546e47286f05218c3f4b97b65378a5
8X8D5    DAX    5,847 cb17325f6c643d7bff49091b0ea1b1052c4be3ca
8X8D6    DAX   10,285 e9e162928b4ccee9f399495c2dda4412edbe2b96
8X8D7    DAX    9,820 73ee497a92bc9582e4158f10540115b6ded85724
8X8D8    DAX   14,510 8f1c81ee6fb2002e37be076032f8191cba04d021
BACPAC   DAX   11,328 73dbc465eacea1225b9eec9df001098272d8dfb3
BODY1    DAX    4,139 9e58757fed9b57898f73208c8605d6ffb7692588
BODY2    DAX    7,685 008fab15b9f76ba3c6cf14d9e808583224e8fcd7
BODY3    DAX   21,505 782eb379bedc2229462c494267177e8ea55c0c4e
BODY4    DAX    4,185 5f7fa1aebadea2a9ff0a0942378385bf2ca1a5f6
BODY5    DAX    8,230 8d00713ff50891cb630ff5e3e2a75e193ca0a62e
BODY6    DAX    6,545 970425875dd0821f8144a1223841c23ae802e3f8
BODY7    DAX    5,717 0470d917c4e10f809038749dbc08ea6f2ba38c02
BODY8    DAX    3,973 e2ecaa7bb2fe7ded215b63cb4599cf3c22bebb81
CBODY    DAX   23,978 7618d0aa4e02ccc052763fea57eb08a5aa55aee3
CHEAD    DAX    3,442 b46b95c4a5382ccab7f68d548b5dab815a957fa4
COMSPR   DAX    3,612 0e5989b83587fc5d2d0ba2fa332271b56b7996f4
CPIC1    DAX    6,182 ca15b89462dfff73733e4ab563fe20bc4f8df6bb
CPIC2    DAX   11,505 3b979e3e96109764b0b813afdccf95689e6df2b4
CPIC3    DAX    3,150 a278b4d6e8ea2fae7ce493c59d539afdba51f83d
CPIC4    DAX   12,154 df1b114d4176269a2b2901a53dd3a664ca836ec2
CPIC5    DAX    7,779 4d6846184e2d7bba6743db61fe16a87a10e9f2c1
CPIC6    DAX    8,101 bde3cd0e4940ebb3e4955930f2b30f8793046728
CPIC7    DAX    6,178 80c3af5e135c5fff80fed37d573d0470d2222579
CPIC8    DAX   10,325 c0f0870feae3cd1a797654317eb1e1801797eb3d
DUNGCOM  DAX    5,664 47776f0846076205f997c4ad9fb34fd920006829
ECL1     DAX   14,564 7e36ed664db365d64b097d901ee98dcb99867025
ECL2     DAX   19,968 b53792899a7ae9d6bf61520dffdb4eea99085965
ECL3     DAX   24,955 d520b3e3c0e9766230522345c89d8a0e243d3e7a
ECL4     DAX   19,950 eeeff14d43cc48a1191b81f023821395b679cbae
ECL5     DAX   27,914 c97645ee6064ebd200dfdf35f164034ef7cf9639
ECL6     DAX   24,894 d7ba53fafd14e4edc4669782608f8bb4a3a5d5d7
ECL7     DAX   23,574 93f7a73ab33ad2b648c31cb90ebce23e74933074
ECL8     DAX   24,167 5a7630340c55b9ebca2b0de3eb417e3cdba56aea
FINAL5   DAX   36,603 9ac475f2dabd657f99784dfd65178fa7d415da4e
GAME     OVR  203,147 6672d7f0468a35dc4d27dea188d65c1cad49daae (v1.2)
              206,105 31c12ed05c5745459df5e6cbd0369dbcbcf302c5 (v1.3, original)
              206,105 1f59247a85014a49db3263048a5a61c5646dbad4 (v1.3, GOG)
GEO1     DAX    2,619 ed5b0ff5ce50aa97d22595399c1c93f60791f012
GEO2     DAX    2,572 0cb08a06fb0ce76ca486854b63ef3c1165a3d0a6
GEO3     DAX    1,761 364882518030c02a53b65cbf9048fdf9f332646b
GEO4     DAX    2,861 9098aa3f69138c8ef867afc15ff93e14644fae5a
GEO5     DAX    3,612 1754a431c5ce036a0fb4f2683f8fb1517815bcb3
GEO6     DAX    2,324 e766492b67353bdc1dbb9f492635cabff29bd043
GEO7     DAX    3,118 ef8511af4f6addfda91cc7b0a1167653cf763636
GEO8     DAX    4,690 5f456e086e6b7a4b1fabb4d58dbcd6b8b9827a00
HEAD1    DAX    1,863 44f5bafc0030d4afcff36734373f10999b17c6c9
HEAD2    DAX    2,808 03a7839839415c97936031daba619f2b9b66d07e
HEAD3    DAX   12,403 c7f37f6a0c97d21312cdc54f45d5e77dde851602
HEAD4    DAX    1,702 89bba2b937f643a87b7f05deadffffc874833cc9
HEAD5    DAX    6,708 4d24f4c927c35b64dab591003247c991f2e0f6d7
HEAD6    DAX    4,577 a46bbd899f66b96d904bffff96e5392999794872
HEAD7    DAX    6,192 b54ef998a2743e9dfc82f9bf82625d0abca3189b
HEAD8    DAX    1,814 9614ed710af1a9a551516d86ef320f65f3a367cd
ICON     DAX    1,287 25707444919e241310e54d971d4e3e505ffb83c1
ITEM1    DAX    2,785 aa40dedcdaba3bfd05fcaff23c8988808424632b
ITEM2    DAX      632 73991196f80c0afeb069a555d060ab86d199e6e2
ITEM3    DAX    4,687 3fbe2a23f81eb89dfe0199c808797a75d1da89b8
ITEM4    DAX    2,364 bc27df1d47259bf4203a2cb0320d4b84c08efa54
ITEM5    DAX    2,130 d9f1f13893584a3ed8c0535a8f8ab3e570596efd
ITEM6    DAX       27 08c1a2e2f037dfb9fa91b2d1638b9b01b50d1a0d
ITEM7    DAX       81 341b11927880db9055c120c05de2a40088e90b34
ITEM8    DAX      716 251e3e1d3a6c810ac5e89aabb8d723abee8a4a3b
ITEMS           2,050 fc6edcddf095cd0be4bd42d343c496d4b4857f3e
MON1CHA  DAX    1,766 c8a067d50f3fdca0e7b434f51d1f530d62e93185
MON1ITM  DAX      792 f13d20f39764f3e382650147ece3f2aec0c57ee6
MON2CHA  DAX    3,254 f3792d94976bf770e87389fa4b396c605de41c39
MON2ITM  DAX    1,293 59ac1b89f7ee29f62952dd6775e3c78c01b5f4e8
MON2SPC  DAX      150 948414795aa004c26505b4871c0356a6817f176e
MON3CHA  DAX    2,521 178550f8a5065ef04854b1449b55f33ddb8ed337
MON3ITM  DAX    1,329 7528284eb7b3121043e16372bae683f26863628c
MON4CHA  DAX    3,006 b5eed8abedf3ac524a197fb7bc0d199dbfb5345d
MON4ITM  DAX      349 ebf5bccadcd2563e2f9d5eada2530e6438512f1f
MON4SPC  DAX      904 9bbaaa91dd34e45007f3e0d8719b634bbe5d70fc
MON5CHA  DAX    2,377 6559f2f31a88a1c8a5e87d684980d250be6c36b7
MON5ITM  DAX      739 ae0c2dfb3e336144894cedaede22ca0b4d5c5c51
MON5SPC  DAX      238 219360d70edd4fc0c3e0b1f1d337fcc4da062f32
MON6CHA  DAX    2,562 559e9af4e7f227961bff37f94fb6326bb5624242
MON6ITM  DAX      978 2989d8c814e22a946d055d988d4966210024b58a
MON6SPC  DAX      124 912e6d53fd21e11784545cb224d395a2760b443a
MON7CHA  DAX    2,773 e2a66db00b292f409cef4b029b22a64ad35b44a4
MON7ITM  DAX    1,320 1203f60b81fd216fb879c34be05c87f34f4c2782
MON7SPC  DAX       36 2a44e79bde96140e222c6a1aafb50a9e59673c60
MON8CHA  DAX    2,042 4cf47d534e1b6b17678360ffcb41afaa97e4b856
MON8ITM  DAX      350 914aa2bef1a0e76d136d0a2500921a5e417c65ab
MON8SPC  DAX      134 daa9a709101cc5b4abd7435092f66b047e7d989e
PIC1     DAX   36,273 319be96958ad39a9623ddbdc7b070b57286aedcd
PIC2     DAX   71,533 e649a77b9debae9a26cf3a83894dfbe13f9bdddc
PIC3     DAX   15,316 5c9515e94a7b4233deeeebc4c20fc709603c8d12
PIC4     DAX   91,885 945d19cfebf02198b09eac43a07c79380c4973a1
PIC5     DAX   46,750 29435cbe64875a5395dde92c2595e01bf5e373f5
PIC6     DAX   66,888 030e72440b90846c253ebb61e90af99eb709ee39
PIC7     DAX   67,804 e4e831af77f0052277342dc1f2e9681db41af2a5
PIC8     DAX   67,227 ba488f6c20596c2e49cbae53e0a76384dd8af515
RANDCOM  DAX      755 6fc96fec8bb011de1894677f4196c44b9453dc44
SPRIT1   DAX    5,613 76c67529032c9b57bdb4c1ec62e14940a04758b2
SPRIT2   DAX   16,768 0869162ce865b3346b448765394a7aa3bf74daa2
SPRIT3   DAX    6,124 6dcded5561c593b3f64178f65a06cfa2ae0736fb
SPRIT4   DAX   11,176 2cb4561d1995d5b15735d573a8a41ffd4f790afc
SPRIT5   DAX   13,174 311ae2834aafa78b83b505cde6fa4f217778e4ab
SPRIT6   DAX   13,727 23d166cbead3e1715c5481f7789afa62c1f9d76b
SPRIT7   DAX   12,985 2755ef3b7665211d2fc5979f1939c898e6dc5ab5
SPRIT8   DAX   14,853 3038b3a808055a186b441b9187b1f61934cf7672
SQRPACI  DAX   69,788 3351c1eebf0352663bc053a2596eb92c1c88df9b
START    EXE   75,536 bd814a271139ca080c2b2e9d6418f381265f4da7 (v1.2)
               65,231 0640ba4fabdc9120dc89c518fab04e388164e2a2 (v1.3)
TITLE    DAX   33,898 39170f1280b6332e69695fbd8390554c339d1da0
WALLDEF1 DAX    2,147 34dd7128cffc194293ffd70ddcef94c97a58997e
WALLDEF2 DAX    4,044 46fa9788dffc6a1a9a042326da4226a2bb0d1663
WALLDEF3 DAX    4,289 51f750491762fc8264d750e91911855a905524ce
WALLDEF4 DAX    4,956 23a11eaa74da8cfbae2096bf008cfc740970568e
WALLDEF5 DAX    2,121 37bb9622c48e38fafdd6fee60df281e444bc0fc8
WALLDEF6 DAX    3,492 c13682fe7be1d307bf42a796b70d4e1c6a9b9ef1
WALLDEF7 DAX    3,176 09aca6c662c47ff3d3e7311a059e1e018e4edc9f
WALLDEF8 DAX    4,998 21e14240f82dacc0b2d56649e74f03e23563f7f9
WILDCOM  DAX    5,786 f17701ad0612056574e300cd22acd8aec551745c

START.EXE (ST.EXE in some distributions; there is no functional difference) and
GAME.OVR are the compiled executable.  This is usually one file for either
small programs or modern ones; this split, common in DOS, is roughly
analogous to living organism's genome being split over multiple chromosomes.

START.EXE and GAME.OVR have the following original timestamps:
* v1.2: 1989-05-09 14:30
* v1.3: 1992-09-04 03:17

For other files, any digit refers to the disk number.  This is the actual disk
number on 8-bit systems (which came on both sides of 4 physical disks; unlike
DOS/Windows you have to physically flip over a two-sided floppy disk), which
the DOS version still treats as a virtual disk number.

Almost all other files have the extension DAX and are compressed archives; see
"DAX File Format" for details.

Data file overview (? is the virtual disk number):
8X8D?    8x8 symbol sets (8X8D1 includes the special case of the game font)
BACPAC   Wilderness map graphics 1
BODY?    Humanoid body graphics
CBODY    Character body combat icons
CHEAD    Character head combat icons
COMSPR   Common combat icons 1
CPIC?    Monster combat icons
DUNGCOM  Dungeon combat map icons
ECL?     ECL scripts (see Script Overview)
FINAL?   Endgame graphics
GEO?     3D maps (see 3D Map Format)
HEAD?    Humanoid head graphics
ICON     Wilderness 2D map party icon
ITEM?    Placed nonrandom item treasure (see Item Format)
ITEMS    Base items (see Base Item Format)
MON?CHA  Monster creature records (see Creature Format)
MON?ITM  Monster item records (see Item Format)
MON?SPC  Monster effect records (see Effect Format)
PIC?     Adventuring graphics
RANDCOM  Common combat icons 2
SPRIT?   Monster adventuring graphics
SQRPACI  Wilderness map graphics 2
TITLE    Title screen
WALLDEF? 3D map graphics
WILDCOM  Wilderness combat map icons

All graphics (every file above that does not refer to its format) are at some
level image buffers; see Image Buffer Format for details.

SECTION 12.2.1 - DAX File Format
--------------------------------

The DAX file format compresses multiple files in each DAX data archive file,
using a form of run-length encoding.

Header:
  * 2 bytes: 16-bit length of the rest of the header
  * Series of 9-byte file descriptors:
       Hex
    Offset  Function
        00  Number of this file (must be unique within this specific DAX)
     01-04  offset of the beginning of the file
     05-06  length of the decompressed file
     07-08  length of the compressed data

File (offsets do not count the header):
  First byte is the run length:
  * If run length 0...126:
    Copy the next (run length + 1) bytes to the decompressed file as-is.
  * If run length 129...255:
    Treat run length as signed 8-bit, then negate: repeat this number of the
    succeeding byte.
  * If run length 127...128:
    This causes an infinite loop; DAX file contents are expected to be well-
    behaved once loaded.
  If there are data left, the next byte is now the new run length.

This isn't very good even by 1988 standards, but it's fast and simple.

SECTION 12.2.2.1 - Creature Format
----------------------------------

This is for both characters (*.SAV in a saved game, *.CHA outside the party)
and monsters (stored in MON?CHA.DAX).  This also applies both on-disk and in
real memory (but not the GBVM).

A * indicates fields values that are defined, but not supported, by the game.
There are no fields for base values of the six stats, unlike all later Gold
  Box games.  Pool of Radiance resorts to some messy hacks to handle this,
  which can cause unexpected behavior.
For known spells (0x33...0x69), 0 means spell is not known, 1 means spell is
  known.  The number of the spell description is used in memorized spells
  (0x17...0x2B).
Pointers do not mean anything saved to disk, only in actual memory.

    Hex
 Offset  Function (offsets are in hexadecimal, values are in decimal)
000-00F  Character name (Pascal-encoded)
    010  Strength (current; does not include extraordinary Strength)
    011  Intelligence (current)
    012  Wisdom (current)
    013  Dexterity (current)
    014  Constitution (current)
    015  Charisma (current)
    016  Extraordinary strength (current; only valid when offset 0x10 = 18)
017-02B  Memorized spells (0 means no spell; anything else is a single spell;
         spell can be marked as to be memorized by setting bit 128)
    02C  Camp spell preparation base time in hours
    02D  Base 60 minus THAC0
    02E  Race:
           0 monster
           1 dwarf
           2 elf
           3 gnome
           4 half-elf
           5 halfling
           6* half-orc
           7 human
    02F  Class:
           0 cleric
           1* druid
           2 fighter
           3* paladin
           4* ranger
           5 magic-user
           6 thief
           7* monk
           8 cleric/fighter
           9 cleric/fighter/magic-user
           10* cleric/ranger
           11 cleric/magic-user
           12* cleric/thief
           13 fighter/magic-user
           14 fighter/thief
           15 fighter/magic-user/thief
           16 magic-user/thief
           17* monster
030-031  Age
    032  Maximum hit points
    033  Spell  1: C1 Bless
    034  Spell  2: C1 Curse
    035  Spell  3: C1 Cure Light Wounds
    036  Spell  4: C1 Cause Light Wounds
    037  Spell  5: C1 Detect Magic
    038  Spell  6: C1 Protection from Evil
    039  Spell  7: C1 Protection from Good
    03A  Spell  8: C1 Resist Cold
    03B  Spell  9: M1 Burning Hands
    03C  Spell 10: M1 Charm Person
    03D  Spell 11: M1 Detect Magic
    03E  Spell 12: M1 Enlarge
    03F  Spell 13: M1 Reduce
    040  Spell 14: M1 Friends
    041  Spell 15: M1 Magic Missile
    042  Spell 16: M1 Protection from Evil
    043  Spell 17: M1 Protection from Good
    044  Spell 18: M1 Read Magic
    045  Spell 19: M1 Shield
    046  Spell 20: M1 Shocking Grasp
    047  Spell 21: M1 Sleep
    048  Spell 22: C2 Find Traps
    049  Spell 23: C2 Hold Person
    04A  Spell 24: C2 Resist Fire
    04B  Spell 25: C2 Silence, 15' Radius
    04C  Spell 26: C2 Slow Poison
    04D  Spell 27: C2 Snake Charm
    04E  Spell 28: C2 Spiritual Hammer
    04F  Spell 29: M2 Detect Invisibility
    050  Spell 30: M2 Invisibility
    051  Spell 31: M2 Knock
    052  Spell 32: M2 Mirror Image
    053  Spell 33: M2 Ray of Enfeeblement
    054  Spell 34: M2 Stinking Cloud
    055  Spell 35: M2 Strength
    056  Spell 36: C3 Animate Dead
    057  Spell 37: C3 Cure Blindness
    058  Spell 38: C3 Cause Blindness
    059  Spell 39: C3 Cure Disease
    05A  Spell 40: C3 Cause Disease
    05B  Spell 41: C3 Dispel Magic
    05C  Spell 42: C3 Prayer
    05D  Spell 43: C3 Remove Curse
    05E  Spell 44: C3 Bestow Curse
    05F  Spell 45: M3 Blink
    060  Spell 46: M3 Dispel Magic
    061  Spell 47: M3 Fireball
    062  Spell 48: M3 Haste
    063  Spell 49: M3 Hold Person
    064  Spell 50: M3 Invisibility, 10' Radius
    065  Spell 51: M3 Lightning Bolt
    066  Spell 52: M3 Protection from Evil, 10' Radius
    067  Spell 53: M3 Protection from Good, 10' Radius
    068  Spell 54: M3 Protection from Normal Missiles
    069  Spell 55: M3 Slow
    06A  Spell 56: C7 Restoration
    06B  Sweep attack maximum targets
    06C  Lower 7 bits, icon size (1 = 1x1, 2 = 1x2, 3 = 2x1, 4 = 2x2)
         bit 128 = creature is Large or larger; for internal use only, this is
         set to 0 if the creature is out of play
    06D  Base saving throw vs. paralyzation, poison or death
    06E  Base saving throw vs. petrification or polymorph
    06F  Base saving throw vs. rod, staff or wand
    070  Base saving throw vs. breath weapon
    071  Base saving throw vs. spell
    072  Base movement
    073  Hit dice
    074  Drained levels (normally 0 for PCs, 255 for anything else)
    075  Drained hit points (normally 0 for PCs, 255 for anything else)
    076  Undead turning index (number indicates which line on table)
    077  Thief skill (includes all modifiers): Pick Pockets
    078  Thief skill (includes all modifiers): Open Locks
    079  Thief skill (includes all modifiers): Find/Remove Traps
    07A  Thief skill (includes all modifiers): Move Silently
    07B  Thief skill (includes all modifiers): Hide in Shadows
    07C  Thief skill (includes all modifiers): Hear Noise
    07D  Thief skill (includes all modifiers): Climb Walls
    07E  Thief skill (includes all modifiers): Read Languages
07F-082  Pointer to Effect linked list
    083  (unknown, never referenced, always 255 for monsters)
    084  Morale and NPC status; bit 128 is set if not a PC; 0 for PCs, 255 for
         monsters.  0 (PCs) and 179 can handle money normally.  NPC morale
         equals this minus 128 then divided by 2.  Friendly monsters that are
         not PCs or NPCs have this set to GBVM $6DC6.
    085  NPC treasure share (lower 3 bits only; upper 5 bits unknown and not
         ever referenced to my knowledge)
086-087  (unknown, never referenced, always 0 for monsters)
088-089  Copper coins
08A-08B  Silver coins
08C-08D  Electrum coins
08E-08F  Gold coins
090-091  Platinum coins
092-093  Gems
094-095  Jewelry
    096  Cleric level
    097* Druid level
    098  Fighter level
    099* Paladin level
    09A* Ranger level
    09B  Magic-user level
    09C  Thief level
    09D* Monk level
    09E  Gender:
           0 male
           1 female
    09F  Monster type (there are a few miscategorized monsters):
           0 humanoid
           1 monstrous humanoid
           2 giant
           3 dragon
           4 undead
           7 extra-dimensional
           8 fire-based
           9 cold-based
           10 regenerating
           11 non-snake reptile or amphibian
           12 avian
           14 snake or scorpion
           15 quadruped
           16 insect
           17 generic monster
    0A0  Alignment:
           0 lawful good
           1 lawful neutral
           2 lawful evil
           3 neutral good
           4 true neutral
           5 neutral evil
           6 chaotic good
           7 chaotic neutral
           8 chaotic evil
    0A1  Base number of primary attacks, multiplied by 2
    0A2  Base number of secondary attacks, multiplied by 2
    0A3  Base primary attack number of dice
    0A4  Base secondary attack number of dice
    0A5  Base primary attack dice sides
    0A6  Base secondary attack dice sides
    0A7  Base primary attack bonus damage (without modifiers)
    0A8  Base secondary attack bonus damage (without modifiers)
    0A9  Base 60 minus Armor Class
    0AA  Strength modifiers to-hit and to-damage allowed flag
    0AB  Randomized combat icon (not believed to be actually used)
0AC-0AF  Experience
    0B0  Item usability flags
    0B1  Maximum hit points without Constitution modifiers or "M"odify
    0B2  Cleric 1st level spell slots
    0B3  Cleric 2nd level spell slots
    0B4  Cleric 3rd level spell slots
    0B5  Magic-user 1st level spell slots
    0B6  Magic-user 2nd level spell slots
    0B7  Magic-user 3rd level spell slots
0B8-0B9  Experience award base for defeating
    0BA  Experience award per HP for defeating
    0BB  Portrait head (1...14)
    0BC  Portrait body (1...12)
    0BD  Icon head (0...13)
    0BE  Icon weapon (0...15)
    0BF  Icon animation index (0...25; not meaningful on disk)
    0C0  Icon height (1 = short, 2 = tall)
0C1-0C6  Icon colors
    0C7  Number of inventory items
0C8-0CB  Pointer to inventory (as linked list)
0CC-0CF  Pointer to equipped weapon
0D0-0D3  Pointer to equipped shield
0D4-0D7  Pointer to equipped body armor
0D8-0DB  Pointer to equipped gauntlets
0DC-0DF  Pointer to equipped helm
0E0-0E3  Pointer to equipped belt
0E4-0E7  Pointer to equipped robe
0E8-0EB  Pointer to equipped cloak
0EC-0EF  Pointer to equipped boots
0F0-0F3  Pointer to equipped ring 1
0F4-0F7  Pointer to equipped ring 2
0F8-0FB  Pointer to equipped arrow
0FC-0FF  Pointer to equipped bolt
    100  Hands used
    101  Saving throw bonus
102-103  Encumbrance in coins
104-107  Pointer to next Creature (creatures are organized as linked lists)
108-10B  Pointer to combat information
    10C  Status: (anything not listed here is an effect, not a status)
           0 okay
           1 animated
           2 tempgone
           3 running
           4 unconscious
           5 dying
           6 dead
           7 stoned
           8 gone
    10D  In play flag (mostly synonymous with status is Okay or Animated)
    10E  Hostility flag
    10F  Autocombat flag
    110  Current 60 minus THAC0
    111  Current 60 minus Armor Class
    112  Current 60 minus Armor Class for rear attacks
    113  Primary attacks remaining, multiplied by 2
    114  Secondary attacks remaining, multiplied by 2
    115  Current primary attack number of dice
    116  Current secondary attack number of dice
    117  Current primary attack dice sides
    118  Current secondary attack dice sides
    119  Current primary attack bonus damage
    11A  Current secondary attack bonus damage
    11B  Current hit points
    11C  Current movement

SECTION 12.2.2.2 - Statistics Minima and Maxima Table Format
------------------------------------------------------------

Each record is 16 bytes.

  Hex
Offs.  Meaning
   00  Strength minimum, male
   01  Strength minimum, female
   02  Strength maximum, male
   03  Strength maximum, female
   04  Extraordinary Strength maximum, male
   05  Extraordinary Strength maximum, female
   06  Intelligence minimum
   07  Intelligence maximum
   08  Wisdom minimum
   09  Wisdom maximum
   0A  Dexterity minimum
   0B  Dexterity maximum
   0C  Constitution minimum
   0D  Constitution maximum
   0E  Charisma minimum
   0F  Charisma maximum

SECTION 12.2.2.3 - Experience and Spells Table Format
-----------------------------------------------------

Each record is 56 bytes.  Entries are arranged first by level, beginning at
level 2, then by class.

* First 32 bytes:
  8 int32, for experience required (2...9; -1 means disallowed)
* Last 24 bytes:
  8 arrays of 3 uint8, for total spells per level (2...9)

SECTION 12.2.3 - Effect Format
------------------------------

Each record is 9 bytes; this is for both characters and monsters, and applies
both on-disk and in-memory.  On-disk storage is named *.SPC for characters, and
MON?SPC (inside MON?SPC.DAX) for monsters.

  Hex
Offs.  Function (offsets are in hexadecimal, values are in decimal)
   00  Effect ID: (specific spell effects are capitalized)
          1 Bless
          2 Curse
          3 wielding undead slaying weapon
          4 starting to train with Manual of Bodily Health (adds effect 7)
          5 Detect Magic
          6 wielding Flame Tongue weapon (the Flame Tongue sword fails to
            confer this effect)
          7 training with Manual of Modily Health
          8 Protection from Evil (either version)
          9 Protection from Good
         10 Resist Cold
         11 charmed
         12 Enlarge
         13 Reduce
         14 Friends
         15 Slow Poison damage
         16 Read Magic
         17 Shield
         18 gnome THAC0 bonus versus kobolds and goblins
         19 Find Traps
         20 Resist Fire
         21 Silence, 15' Radius
         22 Slow Poison expiration
         23 Spiritual Hammer
         24 see invisibility (works on 25 but not 71)
         25 invisibility
         26 dwarf THAC0 bonus versus half-orcs, goblins, hobgoblins, and orcs
         27 feather falling
         28 Mirror Image
         29 Ray of Enfeeblement
         30 coughing from Stinking Cloud
         31 helplessness (any source other than effects 51...53)
         32 Animate Dead
         33 blind
         34 diseased (causes effects 43 and 44)
         35 affected by allied Prayer
         36 Bestow Curse
         37 blinking
         38 extra strength
         39 hasted
         40 cast Stinking Cloud
         41 Protection from Normal Missiles
         42 slowed
         43 diseased (Strength drain)
         44 diseased (hit point drain)
         45 Protection from Evil, 10' Radius
         46 Protection from Good, 10' Radius
         47 dwarf/gnome AC bonus versus ogres, trolls, ogre magi, giants, and
            titans
         48 gnome AC bonus versus gnolls and bugbears
         49 Prayer
         50 mummy rot heal blocking (blocks most forms of healing; restores 1
            hit point every 10 days)
         51 Snake Charm
         52 held or paralyzed
         53 sleeping
         54 repulsed (unimplemented bronze dragon attack)
         55 poisoned
         56 wearing Ring of Invisibility
         57 mummy rot degeneration (lose 2 points of Charisma every 30 days;
            permanent death after 1d6 months)
         58 immobile
         59 add regeneration upon expiration
         60 unknown, unused
         61 wearing Ring of Fire Resistance
         62 regeneration from Constitution 20+
         63 unknown, unimplemented (must be able to suppress being targeted,
            but a handler doesn't exist)
         64 melee poison attack (unmodified saving throw)
         65 melee poison attack (+4 bonus to saving throw)
         66 melee poison attack (+2 bonus to saving throw)
         67 melee paralysis attack (save or be paralyzed for 2d8 minutes)
         68 melee paralysis attack (does not affect elves)
         69 melee paralysis attack (-2 penalty to saving throw, supposedly)
         70 melee poison attack (-2 penalty to saving throw)
         71 invisible (from dust; detect invisibility does not work on this)
         72 camouflaged (from Cloak of Elvenkind)
         73 rear claw rake (2 additional 2d4 attacks if 2 melee attacks hit)
         74 bite and hold process
         75 blood drained (1d4 damage per round, 12 damage total)
         76 melee blood draining attachment attack (blood drain and hold)
         77 melee bite and hold attack (bite attack holds defender in place)
         78 healed unconscious creature to positive HP during combat
         79 melee fire touch (2d10 additional fire damage)
         80 melee acid attack (1d4 additional acid damage)
         81 dragon fear aura (opponents with 3 or fewer HD must save vs. spell
            or be paralyzed indefinitely; opponents with 4...5 HD must save vs.
            spell or be cursed indefinitely)
         82 mummy fear aura (all opponents must save or be paralyzed; +1 bonus
            to save for party of 6 or more; +2 bonus to save for humans)
         83 petrifying gaze
         84 charming gaze (free Charm Person every round; -2 penalty to save)
         85 melee level-draining attack (1 level)
         86 melee level-draining attack (2 levels)
         87 melee mummy rot attack
         88 electrical breath attack (range 10, 100% chance in first round,
            50% chance thereafter, maximum 3 shots; area of effect as lightning
            bolt, max HP damage, save vs. breath weapon for half damage)
         89 displaced
         90 dwarf/halfling Constitution poison saving throw bonus (applies also
            to paralyzation/death)
         91 immunity to electricity and Magic Missile
         92 unknown, unused
         93 half damage from fire
         94 half damage from blunt or piercing weapons
         95 fighting on after being reduced to -6...0 hit points
         96 immunity to weapons that are neither silver nor magical
         97 dwarf/gnome/halfling Constitution spell/wand saving throw bonus
         98 regenerate 3 hit points per round
         99 keeps fighting after becoming unconscious (gain 1d4+1 minutes of
            95)
        100 troll vulnerability to fire and acid (only works if *all* damage is
            fire or acid); can return from death in 3d6 rounds otherwise
        101 troll add regeneration
        102 troll returning from going down
        103 can assume gaseous form
        104 thri-kreen missile evasion (60% chance of avoiding missile
            attacks)
        105 50% magic resistance (unused)
        106 85% magic resistance
        107 elven 90% resistance to sleep and charm spells
        108 immunity to sleep and charm
        109 immunity to paralysis (Hold Person and wand only)
        110 immunity to cold
        111 immunity to paralysis and poison
        112 immunity to fire
        113 efreeti fire resistance (-1 damage per fire damage die)
        114 half damage from electricity
        115 half damage from piercing or slashing weapons
        116 half damage from magical weapons
        117 vulnerability to holy water
        118 half damage from cold
        119 immunity to non-magical weapons (does not apply if attacker is not
            a PC race and has 4+ HD)
        120 boulder evasion (50% chance of avoiding thrown boulders)
        121 anhkheg acid squirt attack (25% chance of happening, max range 3,
            8d4 damage that isn't actually acid damage, save vs. breath weapon
            for half damage)
        122 mummy vulnerability to fire (magic or fire does +1 damage per die;
            3d8 damage from flasks of oil)
        123 immunity to weapons that are neither silver (half damage) nor
            magical
        124 half-elven 30% resistance to sleep and charm spells
        125 immunity to sleep, charm, paralysis, and poison
        126 suppressible gaze attack
        127 reflectable gaze
01-02 uint16 minutes remaining of effect (0 for permanent); exception:
         75 (blood drain): upper 4 bits of lower byte represent blood drain
            damage remaining
   03 255 indicates nothing special except immunity to Dispel Magic; if not:
      * If Strength-modifying effect (effect ID 12 or 38):
        If base Strength is 18, extraordinary Strength + 1
        If not, base Strength + 100
        Add 128 if this effect is weaker than another Strength-modifying effect
      * lower 4 bits are usually spellcasting level, for Dispel Magic.
        Exceptions (other than Strength effects):
          14 (Friends): base Charisma score
          28 (Mirror Image): number of images remaining
          75 (blood drain): index of target creature in creature array
      * upper 4 bits (for other than Strength effects):
          11 (charmed):
              bit 16 unknown (unreferenced)
              bit 32 flag for skipping applying new flags when applying effect
              bit 64 original hostility flag
          32 (Animate Dead):
              bit 16 original hostility flag
          39 (hasted):
              bit 16 aging effect applied flag
          40 (cast Stinking Cloud): Stinking Cloud index
          49 (Prayer):
              bit 16 hostility flag of caster
          57 (mummy rot degeneration): months remaining to live
          89 (displaced):
              bit 16 displacement attack prevention has triggered
      Dispel Magic checks the lower 4 bits if this isn't 255, which can cause
      unexpected behavior.
   04 Boolean if removing effect calls effect handler
05-08 Pointer to next Effect (a creature's effects are a linked list); not
      meaningful when stored on disk

Effects may be triggered given a condition type:
  0 suppress free actions (126)
  1 suppress being targeted (25, 37, 63, 71)
  2 attacker doing damage with primary attack (68, 73, 76, 77, 79, 80, 85...87)
  3 attacker doing damage with secondary attack (64...70, 79, 85...87)
  4 attacker has inflicted weapon damage (3, 6, 29)
  5 defender has taken weapon damage (28, 41, 60, 94, 96, 101, 104, 115...117,
    119, 120, 122, 123)
  6 damaged by non-weapon (10, 17, 20, 28, 60, 61, 90, 93, 101, 105, 106,
    112...114, 118, 122)
  7 helpless (31, 51, 52, 53)
  8 start of combat (56, 72, 81, 82, 89, 99)
  9 immune to effect (105...112, 124, 125)
 10 attacking with THAC0 roll (1...3, 6, 18, 26, 33, 36, 49)
 11 affects Armor Class (8, 9, 17, 30, 33, 45, 46)
 12 affects saving throw (8...10, 17, 20, 33, 36, 45, 46, 49, 61, 90, 97, 111,
    125)
 13 reduced to 0 HP (75, 76, 99, 100, 103)
 14 free actions (83, 84, 88, 121)
 15 start of combat action (11, 21, 30, 74, 75)
 16 defending against THAC0 roll (25, 37, 47, 48, 71, 89)
 17 affects morale (1, 2, 11)
 18 affects movement (39, 42, 58)
 19 end of combat round (11, 23, 56, 72, 98)

SECTION 12.2.4.1 - Item Format
------------------------------

This is for all of characters (*.ITM), placed treasures (inside ITEM?.DAX), and
monsters (inside MON?ITM.DAX).

Each item record is 63 bytes.

  Hex
Offs.  Function (offsets are in hexadecimal, values are in decimal)
00-28  Display name (Pascal String, lowercase OK)
   29  Boolean 0 for any Item (see String Linked List Member Format)
2A-2D  Pointer to next Item (inventories are linked lists in memory); not
       meaningful when stored on disk
   2E  uint8 Type
   2F  uint8 Identified name component 3
   30  uint8 Identified name component 2
   31  uint8 Identified name component 1
   32  int8 Magical bonus
   33  int8 Saving throw bonus
   34  Boolean Equipped (i.e., 0 = unequipped, 1 = equipped)
   35  uint8 Unidentified name components bitmask
   36  Boolean Cursed (i.e., 0 = uncursed, 1 = cursed)
37-38  uint16 Weight in coins
   39  uint8 Quantity (0 = single item that does not stack)
3A-3B  uint16 Item value in gold pieces
3C-3E  Properties:
         If item is scroll: 1...56 are spells (as in Creature File Format); if
           bit 128 is turned on, that spell is flagged for scribing
         If item is any other magical consumable:
           3C = number of charges
           3D = effect (if 80...90: subtract 23 for spell ID):
                 3 Potion of Extra Healing
                47 Wand of Fireballs
                51 Wand of Lightning (Bolt)
                80 Potion of Speed
                81 Keoghtum's Ointment
                82 Potion of Giant Strength
                83 Javelin of Lightning
                84 Wand of Paralyzation
                85 Potion of Healing
                86 Dust of Disappearance
                87 Necklace of Missiles
                88 Wand of Magic Missiles
                89 unknown unimplemented item
                90 Manual of Bodily Health
         Otherwise, check 3E (if not stated otherwise, confers any effect in
           3D if it is not 0):
           129 Ring of Fire Resistance
           131 Gauntlets of Ogre Power
           132 Aligned weapon; must have an alignment equal to the lower 4
               bits of 3D, or take damage equal to the upper 4 bits of 3D
           133 Cloak of Displacement
           134 Cloak of Elvenkind
           135 boulder
           136 Undead slaying weapon
           137 Spiritual Hammer
           139 Ring of Invisibility

SECTION 12.2.4.2 - Base Item Format
-----------------------------------

Base items are in the file named ITEMS, which has a 2-byte header (not ever
referenced in any fashion), followed by an array of 16-byte base item records:

  Hex
Offs.  Function (offsets are in hexadecimal, values are in decimal)
   00  uint8 Slot:
          0 main hand
          1 off hand (shield, mirror, or non-Bane holy symbol)
          2 body armor
          3 gauntlets
          4 helm
          5 belt or necklace
          6 robe
          7 cloak
          8 boots
          9 ring
         10 miscellaneous (including ammunition)
         11 magic-user scroll
         12 clerical scroll
         74 Leather Holy Symbol of Bane
         75 Brass Key
         77 bracers
         78 wand
         80 potion
         82 Efreeti Bottle
         91 Pass
   01  uint8 Hands required to use
   02  uint8 Damage vs. large, dice number
   03  uint8 Damage vs. large, dice sides
   04  int8 Damage vs. large, bonus
   05  uint8 Rate of fire for ranged weapons (multiplied by 2)
   06  uint8 AC adjustment descriptor: If 178 or higher, body armor or bracers
         bonus equal to the excess.  If not, but is 128 or higher, other AC
         bonus equal to the excess.  Values below 128 are ignored; an item must
         have an unignored value here to be eligible for a saving throw
         modifier.
   07  uint8 Weapon type:
           0 slashing
           1 piercing
         128 bashing
   08  unknown (not ever used to my knowledge)
   09  uint8 Damage vs. small/medium, dice number
   0A  uint8 Damage vs. small/medium, dice sides
   0B  int8 Damage vs. small/medium, bonus
   0C  uint8 Range of ranged weapon (exclusive)
   0D  uint8 Class usability bitmask:
         bit 1 magic-user
         bit 2 cleric
         bit 4 thief
         bit 8 fighter
         bit 16* druid
         bit 32* monk
         bit 64* paladin
         bit 128* ranger
   0E  uint8 Weapon properties bitmask:
         bit 1 shoots arrows
         bit 2 Dexterity missile bonus applies to weapon to-hit
         bit 4 Strength bonus applies both to weapon to-hit and weapon damage
         bit 8 AI will consider as primary ranged weapon
         bit 16 thrown
         bit 128 shoots bolts
   0F  unknown (always 0; suspected to be byte alignment)

SECTION 12.2.4.3 - Random Item Array Format
-------------------------------------------

Every integer is 16-bit integer, even if it is 8-bit in the regular item
format, and gets copied to the appropriate item offsets.

  Hex  Item
Offs. Offs.  Function
00-01    2F  Identified name component 3
02-03    30  Identified name component 2
04-05    31  Identified name component 1
06-07 37-38  Weight in coins
08-09 3A-3B  Item value in gold pieces
0A-0B    3C  Property 1
0C-0D    3D  Property 2
0E-0F    3E  Property 3

The following magic numbers (in decimal) are used both to calculate pointers
into the random item array and to distinguish randomly generated items:

  1 Potion of Extra Healing
  9 Potion of Giant Strength
 17 Potion of Healing
 25 Potion of Speed
 33 Scroll of Restoring Levels (code to generate randomly does not exist)
 41 Ring of Feather Falling
 49 Wand of Lightning (code to generate randomly cannot be reached)
 57 Wand of Magic Missiles
 65 Wand of Paralyzation
 73 Gauntlets of Ogre Power (code to generate randomly cannot be reached)
 81 Keoghtum's Ointment
 89 Necklace of Missiles
 97 Cloak of Displacement
105 Javelin of Lightning (code to generate randomly cannot be reached)
113 Wand of Fireballs
121 Ring of Fire Resistance
129 Ring of Invisibility
137 Bag of Holding
145 Cloak of Elvenkind

SECTION 12.2.5.1 - 3D Map Format
--------------------------------

The 3D maps are in GEO?.DAX, and are 1026 bytes.  It has a 2-byte header that
is always ignored, and is loaded to the reserved memory pointed to by DS:6A5C.

Each 3D map is a 16*16 array of 4-byte records:

  Hex
Offs.  Meaning (values are in decimal)
   00  Walls (north, east)
   01  Walls (south, west)
       A wall is a 4-bit integer.
   02  Event (0...255)
   03  Barriers for each direction (north, east, south, west)
       A barrier is a 2-bit integer:
         0 Impassable
         1 Passable
         2 Easy-to-open barred door
         3 Hard-to-open barred door

SECTION 12.2.5.2 - Wilderness Map Special Location Format
---------------------------------------------------------

For wilderness icons that require plot conditions to appear.

Each record is 6 bytes.

  Hex
Offs.  Meaning (values are in decimal)
00-01  Wilderness X-coordinate
02-03  Wilderness Y-coordinate
04-05  Wilderness tile ID

SECTION 12.2.6.1 - Combat Information Format
--------------------------------------------

Each record is 22 bytes.

  Hex
Offs.  Meaning (values are in decimal)
   00  uint8 Current spell ID being cast (0 = no spell)
   01  Boolean Casting allowed flag
   02  Boolean Item use allowed flag (applies only to AI)
   03  int8 initiative
   04  uint8 1 = primary attack, 2 = secondary attack
   05  unknown
   06  Movement times 2
   07  Boolean Guarding flag
   08  Boolean Made attack this round flag (not necessarily done this round)
   09  uint8 direction (0...7; I don't think this can be 8 or 255)
0A-0D  Pointer to other creature
   0E  uint8 Negative hit points
   0F  unknown
   10  Boolean Is turned by cleric flag
   11  Boolean Used turn undead this combat flag
   12  unknown
   13  Boolean Not PC or NPC flag
   14  Boolean Fleeing flag
   15  unknown (something to do with creature AI)

SECTION 12.2.6.2 - Combat Arena Format
--------------------------------------

This describes the combat arena aside from in-play creatures.  The separate
50*25 array at DS:60DB has creature indices.

Each record is 1257 bytes.

  Hex
Offs.  Meaning (values are in decimal)
00-01  unknown
   02  int8 Focus X-coordinate (0...49)
   03  int8 Focus Y-coordinate (0...24)
   04  Boolean unknown
   05  uint8 Focus icon size (1...4), actual creature not required
   06  unknown 8-bit
  07+  uint8 Combat unknown 1 index as 50*25 array; known values:
         31 PC/NPC on battlefield but out of play

SECTION 12.2.6.2 - Combat Arena Location Format
-----------------------------------------------
Each record is 4 bytes.

  Hex
Offs.  Meaning (values are in decimal)
   00  int8 X-coordinate (0...49), upper left for creatures taking >1 tile
   01  int8 Y-coordinate (0...24), upper left for creatures taking >1 tile
   02  unknown
   03  uint8 Icon size (1...4 or 0 for out of play)

SECTION 12.2.6.4 - Combat Target Data Format
--------------------------------------------

Each record is 3 bytes.

  Hex
Offs.  Meaning (values are in decimal)
   00  uint8 Creature index
   01  uint8 Range times 2
   02  unknown

SECTION 12.2.6.5 - Combat Unknown 1 Format
------------------------------------------

This is a constant array stored at DS:2748.

Each record is 4 bytes.

  Hex
Offs.  Meaning (values are in decimal)
   00  uint8 unknown (only possible values are 1 and 255; strongly suspected
       that 1 means passable and 255 means impassable, but I don't think it's
       only that, otherwise SSI would have just used a Boolean)
   01  uint8 unknown (always 0)
   02  uint8 unknown (always either 0 or 2)
   03  uint8 Tile ID

SECTION 12.2.6.6 - Combat Unknown 2 Format
------------------------------------------

Each record is 26 bytes.

  Hex
Offs.  Meaning (values are in decimal)
00-01  int16 X-coordinate A
02-03  int16 Y-coordinate A
04-05  int16 X-coordinate B
06-07  int16 Y-coordinate B
08-09  unknown 16-bit
0A-0B  int16 absolute value of (B - A) X-coordinate
0C-0D  int16 absolute value of (B - A) Y-coordinate
0E-0F  unknown 16-bit
10-11  unknown 16-bit
   12  int8 signum of (B - A) X-coordinate
   13  int8 signum of (B - A) Y-coordinate
14-15  unknown 16-bit
16-17  unknown 16-bit
   18  non-Boolean 8-bit
   19  unknown 8-bit

SECTION 12.2.6.7 - Combat Downed Character Format
-------------------------------------------------

Each record is 7 bytes.

  Hex
Offs.  Meaning (values are in decimal)
00-03  Pointer to Creature
   04  int8 X-coordinate
   05  int8 Y-coordinate
   06  uint8 Combat unknown 1 array index

SECTION 12.2.6.8 - Stinking Cloud Format
----------------------------------------

Each record is 19 bytes.

  Hex
Offs.  Meaning
00-03  Pointer to Creature who cast this Stinking Cloud
04-07  Pointer to next Stinking Cloud (these are stored as a linked list)
08-0B  unknown 8-bit non-Boolean array, 1-indexed, size 4
0C-0F  cloud exists Boolean array, 1-indexed, size 4
   10  int8 Combat arena upper left X-coordinate (0...49)
   11  int8 Combat arena upper left Y-coordinate (0...24)
   12  uint8 index

A Stinking Cloud does not contain information about its expiration; that is
handled by the expiration of an effect upon the caster.

SECTION 12.2.7 - Spell Format
-----------------------------

Each record is 16 bytes.

  Hex
Offs.  Meaning (values are in decimal)
   00  Type:
         0 clerical
         1 magic-user
         2 item
   01  Level of spell
   02  If 255, requires an attack roll; otherwise fixed range
   03  Variable range (multiply by spellcasting level)
   04  Fixed duration
   05  Variable duration (multiply by spellcasting level)
   06  Area of effect (may be adjusted by spell handler):
         0 caster
         4 1 target
         5 up to 2 targets
         6 up to 3 targets
         7 up to 4 targets
         8 any tile within line of sight
         9 diameter 3
        10 diameter 5
        11 diameter 7
       240 no limit to area; scales to caster level
   07  Target:
         0 combat
         1 caster
         2 any party member
         4 whole party
   08  Saving throw success result:
         0 no save allowed
         1 negate
         2 half damage
   09  Saving throw used:
         0 paralyzation, poison or death
         1 petrification or polymorph
         2 rod, staff or wand
         3 breath weapon
         4 spell
   0A  Effect added by spell (0 for none)
   0B  When spell can be cast:
         0 non-combat only
         1 combat only
         2 either
   0C  Spellcasting time
   0D  AI priority (0...7; higher is more likely, 0 is never cast by AI)
   0E  Boolean 1 if the spell is offensive, 0 otherwise
   0F  minimum number of targets required for the AI to cast spell

SECTION 12.2.8 - String Linked List Member Format
-------------------------------------------------

Each record is 46 bytes.  The String and the Pointer to the next String are in
the same locations as in the Item record, so an Item linked list may be read as
a String linked list.

 Hex
Offs.  Meaning
00-28  String
   29  Boolean title flag
2A-2D  Pointer to next String list member

SECTION 12.2.9.1 - Image Buffer Format
--------------------------------------

Each record is 23 bytes plus the size of the image data.

  Hex
Offs.  Meaning
00-01  Height of image in pixels
02-03  Width of image in chars (multiply by 8 for pixels)
04-05  unknown 16-bit
06-07  unknown 16-bit
   08  Images in buffer
09-10  Color map (EGA 16-color to CGA 4-color, as array of 16 nibbles)
11-12  Bytes in one image
13-16  Pointer to extra transparency space (default nil)
  17+  Image data

The size of the base storage space is height * width * images * (2 for CGA, 4
for EGA/Tandy graphics).  The memory allocation request is that plus 23.

If extra transparency space exists, it is equal to base storage for CGA/Tandy,
or 1/4 of base storage for EGA.  Bitmasks are negative bitmasks directly
applied to video memory writes.

For CGA, raw image data are converted to 4-color CGA using the color map,
with any transparent color set to 0.  There is no correction for CGA
interlacing (which is handled elsewhere), but entire rows can be copied as-is
to CGA video memory.

For EGA, raw image data have any transparent color set to 0, and blocks of 8
pixels are converted into 4 bytes of bit plane data; one byte is copied at a
time to EGA video memory.  (So 8 pixels of bit plane data at a time; not an
entire row of bit plane data all at once.)

Tandy graphics are simpler than either CGA or EGA and only require correction
for transparency.

If MCGA 320x200x256 support existed, it would be simpler than any of the above.

For images loaded from a file into an image buffer, this partial transformation
is done right away so the computations required are signficantly reduced.  I
don't believe the color map does anything at all after this.

An icon animation has two image buffers that are only animated actively as the
focus of the action.  Their size must be a multiple of 24 pixels in both
dimensions.

A tile set image buffer has multiple individual tile graphics.

SECTION 12.2.9.2 - Animation Data Format
----------------------------------------

Each record is 66 bytes.  Unlike an icon animation, this can handle up to 8
frames, and may be animated passively in the background.  A frame must be the
size of the 3D window view (88x88 pixels).

  Hes
Offs.  Meaning
   00  Number of frames in animation (maximum 8)
   01  Current frame (1-indexed)
02-41  Array of 8-byte subrecords, size 8:
       00-03 Duration
       04-07 Pointer to image buffer

SECTION 12.2.10 - Copy Protection Format
----------------------------------------

Each record is 21 bytes.

  Hex
Offs.  Meaning
00-06  Answer
07-08  Espruar rune
09-0A  Dethek rune (255 = do not print this character)
0B-14  Path

SECTION 12.3.1 - Script Overview
--------------------------------

The Gold Box games use an internal scripting language to drive events.  This
language is sophisticated enough to be Turing-complete; it's the earliest
computer role-playing game example I'm aware of.  (Games of the era typically
hardcode events in 6502 assembly.)  Infocom's Z-machine is also Turing-
complete, but Zork I is usually not considered a CRPG, even though it has a
combat engine and experience points.

The game scripts, written in Gold Box bytecode that changes a little from game
to game, are in the ECL?.DAX files, where ? is the disk number.  Scripts in
this game always are loaded at $9900 in the Gold Box Virtual Machine (GBVM),
and may not go past $B6FF, for a maximum script length of 7680 bytes.  It is
common for scripts to come close to this limit.  I often wonder what was cut to
fit everything in; there must be copious material that had to be cut for want
of space.

You can modify individual scripts and put them back in the DAX files, but this
may cause save file compatibility problems, as the current script is part of
the saved game.

The scripts are numbered as follows:
 0 Civilized Area (Main)
 1 Buccaneer Base
 2 Cadorna Textile House
 3 Valjevo Castle (Northwest and Southeast)
 4 Valjevo Castle (Northeast)
 5 Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze
 6 Valjevo Castle (Southwest)
 7 Valjevo Castle (Inner Tower)
 8 Civilized Area (Council)
 9 Stojanow Gate
10 Valhingen Graveyard
11 Civilized Area (Training Hall)
13 Kobold Caves
14 Kovel Mansion
15 Mendor's Library
16 Lizardman Keep (and Lizardman Keep Catacombs)
17 Nomad Camp
18 Podol Plaza
19 Silver Dragon Lair
20 Slums
21 Sokal Keep
22 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1
23 Yarash's Pyramid Level 2 and Level 3
24 Wealthy Area (and Temple of Bane)
25 Western Wilderness and Lairs
26 Central Wilderness and Lairs
27 Eastern Wilderness and Lairs
28 Zhentil Keep Outpost
29 Kuto's Well (and Kuto's Well Catacombs)

There are some scripts that cover multiple maps; these are the extra maps
covered:
30 Lizardman Keep Catacombs
31 Temple of Bane
32 Kuto's Well Catacombs

Script/map 12 does not exist.

Scripts always begin with five standard GBVM calling addresses:
1. vm_run_1         - Called by moving around on the map
2. search_location  - Called if move or "L"ook command is issued
3. pre_camp_check   - Called before entering camp main menu
4. camp_interrupted - Called if resting is interrupted
5. initial_entry    - Called after loading an ECL script or loading a game

SECTION 12.3.2 - Script Variable Types
--------------------------------------

All arguments for ECL script opcodes must explicitly declare their types.

GBVM addresses are always 16-bit, and should point to a recognized GBVM
address.  Most recognized addresses fall into one of these ranges:
  $4900...4CFF 16-bit bytes
  $6B00...6EFF 16-bit bytes
  $9700...98FF 16-bit bytes; scratch space for temporary variables
  $9900...B6FF 8-bit bytes; ECL script
  $C04B...C04F 8-bit bytes; current map location

Type Meaning
   0 8-bit integer value
     This is usually a uint8.

     The Gold Box games have multiple ways of handling signed 8-bit integers:
     * THAC0 and Armor Class are stored as (60 - number).
     * Sometimes, 128 is treated as 0.
     * Sometimes, the standard logic for signed 8-bit integers is used.

   1 GBVM address pointing to 8-bit integer value

   2 16-bit unsigned integer
     Always unsigned.  (If you're familar with Infocom's Z-machine, its
     integers are always signed 16-bit.)

   3 GBVM address pointing to 16-bit unsigned integer value

 128 GB string value
     * The first byte has the number of subsequent encoded bytes.
     * The subsequent bytes hold 6-bit values as follows:
       encoded bits: abcdefgh | ijklmnop | qrstuvwx
       decoded bits: abcdef | ghijkl | mnopqr | stuvwx
             0: ignored with no action (not a null terminator)
        1...31: add 64 (thus 1...26 represent A...Z)
       32...63: standard ASCII encoding
     GB string values are only valid within an ECL script, not anywhere else
     in the GBVM.

     Like Infocom's Z-machine, the purpose of this encoding is compression,
     not obfuscation.  The Gold Box games do not handle lowercase letters
     mostly to save space, as SSI's programmers often squeeze data very, very
     tightly.  Both of these are far inferior to short string compression
     algorithms even from the mid-90s, never mind modern algorithms like Smaz.

     Many other 1980s games encode strings not for compression but for
     obfuscation; examples include Magic Candle 1, Might & Magic 2, Phantasie
     1.

 129 GBVM address pointing to C string
     This never points to a GB string or a Pascal String.

SECTION 12.3.3 - Script Opcodes
-------------------------------

All ECL script opcodes are a single byte.  The names for the opcodes are those
given by debug mode in Curse of the Azure Bonds; Pool of Radiance v1.3 does not
have this debugging.

DS:6F7F contains the current ECL opcode.
The arrays at DS:7006, DS:7046, DS:7086, and DS:70C8 have any operands for
  that opcode.

A <var> can be either a value or a GBVM address; for the latter, the value
stored there will be retrieved (dereferenced).

00 EXIT
   Stops script execution, clears the ECL stack, and returns control to the
   player.

01 GOTO <address>
   Continues execution at <address>.

02 GOSUB <address>
   Continues execution at <address>, and pushes the current bytecode address to
   the stack.

03 COMPARE <var1> <var2>
   Compares <var1> and <var2> for a subsequent IF command.

04 ADD <var1> <var2> <address>
   The result <var1> + <var2> is placed at <address>.

05 SUBTRACT <var1> <var2> <address>
   The result of <var2> - <var1> is placed at <address>.  Yes, the subtrahend
   comes first.

06 DIVIDE <var1> <var2> <address>
   The result of <var1> / <var2> is placed at <address>.  This is integer
   division, with the dividend coming first.  The remainder is not saved,
   unlike in later Gold Box games.  Division by zero is not trapped.

07 MULTIPLY <var1> <var2> <address>
   Stores <var1> * <var2> at <address>.

08 RANDOM <var> <address>
   Generates a random integer from 0 to <var>, inclusive and maximum 255, then
   stores it at <address>.

09 SAVE <var> <address>
   Stores <var> at <address>.

0A LOAD CHARACTER <index>
   * If <index> is less than 128:
     Changes the current character using <index>; 0 is first in the marching
     order, and (party size - 1) is the last.  If <index> is at least equal to
     party size, monsters from LOAD MONSTER may be loaded.  References to
     $6B00...6C1B may now reference for the appropriate statistics; SAVE or
     SAVE TABLE for these actually change the character or monster.
   * If <index> is 128 or more:
     Monster (<index> - 128) will be placed on the party's side in the next
     combat.  If $6B00 and $6C00 are subsequently set to 0, this instead
     removes the monster; Pool of Radiance doesn't have the DUMP opcode all
     other Gold Box games have.

0B LOAD MONSTER <monsterID> <count> <pictureID>
   Adds <count> copies (minimum 1) of monster <monsterID> to the monster list,
   and loads graphic <pictureID> from CPIC?.DAX.  (<pictureID> is often equal
   to <monsterID>.)

0C SETUP MONSTER <monsterID> <distance> <pictureID>
   Starts a monster encounter with the primary monster <monsterID>,
   <distance> (0...2) squares away in the first-person view.  Determines actual
   distance of the monsters (they may be closer because of obstructions), and
   displays the appropriate monster graphic.

0D APPROACH
   The monsters from SETUP MONSTER close distance by 1 square.  If distance is
   0, this does nothing.

0E PICTURE <pictureID>
   * If <pictureID> is 255:
     Ends the graphical display and resumes the normal first-person view.
   * If $6DE1 is not 255:
     Displays a composite head and body graphic, using $6DE1 as the head in
     HEAD?.DAX and <pictureID> as the body in BODY?.DAX.
   * If $6DE1 is 255:
     Displays the specified picture from PIC?.DAX in the first-person view.  If
     there is more than one such picture, this displays an animation cycling
     through all such pictures.

0F INPUT NUMBER <maxDigits> <address>
   Asks the player to input a number with <maxDigits> maximum digits, and
   places it at <address>.

10 INPUT STRING <maxLength> <address>
   Asks the player to input a string with <maxLength> maximum characters, and
   places it at <address>.

11 PRINT <string>
   Prints <string> to the text box.

12 PRINTCLEAR <string>
   As above, but clears the text box first.

13 RETURN
   Returns from a GOSUB, with the next command after the most recent GOSUB
   pushed to the stack being executed.

14 COMPARE AND <var1> <var2> <var3> <var4>
   Compares <var1> to <var2> and <var3> to <var4> for a subsequent IF
   command.  Only IF = and IF <> are supported.

15 VERTICAL MENU <address> <message> <count> <stringVarargs>
   Displays <message> as a prompt in the text box, with the player able to
   select from the <count> options listed as <stringVarargs>.  The chosen
   option is placed at <address>, with 0 the first option and (<count> - 1)
   the last.

16 IF =
17 IF <>
18 IF <
19 IF >
1A IF <=
1B IF >=
   All six IF commands will skip the next command unless the most recent:
   * COMPARE has a true comparison
   * COMPARE AND has both comparisons true
   * AND has a true comparison to 0
   * OR has a true comparison to 0
   * FIND ITEM found a character carrying the appropriate item
   This means bit flags are checked with AND followed by an IF <>.

   This will not properly skip the following opcodes:
   * 0C SETUP MONSTER
   * 15 VERTICAL MENU
   * 25 ON GOTO
   * 26 ON GOSUB
   * 2B HORIZONTAL MENU
   * 36 ADD NPC

1C CLEARMONSTERS
   Resets hostile creature flags and resets all treasure.  Does not actually
   remove monsters from the creature list.

1D PARTYSTRENGTH <address>
   Calculates Party Strength using the calculation given in the Party Strength
   section, and places it at <address> as a uint8.

1E CHECKPARTY <attributeAddress> <effectID> <address1> <address2>
              <address3> <address4>
   * If attributeAddress is not 0 and effectID is 0:
     Checks all characters for the values at <attributeAddress>; only $6BA7
     (thief find/remove traps) and $6C1B (movement) are recognized.  Then:
     * <address1> is set to the lowest value
     * <address2> is set to the highest value
     * <address3> is set to the average value
     * <address4> is set to 0
   * If attributeAddress is 0 and effectID is not 0:
     Checks all characters for the given <effectID>.  Then <address4> will hold
     0 if no characters have the effect, or 1 if at least one character does.
     0 is written to the other three addresses.

1F undefined <unknown1> <unknown2>
   Something planned for, but unimplemented; all that remains behind is that it
   probably has 2 operands.

20 NEWECL <scriptID>
   Loads the indicated ECL script.

21 LOAD FILES <mapID> <unused> <suppressLoad>
   * If indoors, loads 3D map file without changing the ECL script.
   * If outdoors and <suppressLoad> is not 255, loads 2D map graphics from
     BACPAC.DAX.
   * In either case, refreshes the screen.

22 PARTY SURPRISE <address1> <address2>
   Initializes <address1> and <address2> for a subsequent SURPRISE command.
   <address1> is the modifier for the party to be surprised by the monsters.
   <address2> is the modifier for the party to surprise the monsters.
   These are both initialized to 0.  If different values are wanted for the
   party, they can be modified before the SURPRISE command.

23 SURPRISE <address1> <address2> <var1> <var2>
   Rolls for surprise, as set up by PARTY SURPRISE; <address1> and <address2>
   are as above.
   <var1> is the modifier for the monsters to surprise the party.
   <var2> is the modifier for the monsters to be surprised by the party.
   For each side, the overall modifiers are added to 2.  If a roll of 1d6 is
   less than or equal to this, that side achieves surprise.

   The modifiers aren't applied correctly; the actual calculations are:
     Monsters surprise party : 2 + <var2> - <address1>
     Party surprises monsters: 2 + <address2> - <var1>
   when it ought to be:
     Monsters surprise party : 2 + <var1> - <address1>
     Party surprises monsters: 2 + <address2> - <var2>
   This still works as expected with no modifiers, as is usually the case.

   The end result is placed at $6DCB:
     0 Neither side surprised
     1 Monsters surprise party
     2 Party surprises monsters
     3 Monsters and party surprise each other

24 COMBAT
   * Usually:
     Starts combat with the list of monsters from LOAD MONSTER.

     Combat can be modified by the following:
     * All monsters (including non-PC/NPC allies) have Morale of $6DC6.
     * If $6DCB is 1 or 2, the surprised side gets a -6 penalty to initiative
       in the first round of combat (which will always prevent any actions for
       any creature without a Dexterity bonus).
     * $6E70 is the int8 modifier to all monsters' THAC0.
     * $6E71 is the int8 modifier to all characters' THAC0.
     * $6E72 is the int8 modifier to all characters' movement.
     * The TREASURE command will load additional items that will show up as
       loot if the party wins.
     * If $6DE3 is 1, the monsters will not drop the items they are carrying.

     After combat:
     * $6DC7 is set to: 0 party won, 128 party lost, 129 party ran away.
     * $6DC8 is set to the number of monsters the party defeated.
     * $6E33 is set to 1 if the party attacked allies during the fight.
     * $6DCB, $6DE3, $6E70, $6E71, and $6E72 are all reset to 0.

   * If $6DE2 is 1:
     The party instead enters a temple.  $6DE2 is reset to 0 when done.

   * If $6E6C is 1:
     The party instead enters a shop.  $6E6C is reset to 0 when done.
     Available items for sale are what was loaded with the TREASURE command.
     Purchase prices would be multiplied by ($6E6D / 16), but $6E6D is always
     16 and this multiplier is only implemented in Curse of the Azure Bonds.

25 ON GOTO <var> <count> <addressVarargs>
   * If <var> is less than <count>, this acts as a GOTO command with the
     corresponding address from <addressVarargs>.
   * If <var> is equal to or greater than <count>, execution falls through to
     the next statement.

26 ON GOSUB <var> <count> <addressVarargs>
   Same as ON GOTO, except a GOSUB is executed.

27 TREASURE <copper> <silver> <electrum> <gold> <platinum>
            <gems> <jewelry> <treasureID>
   This adds all the indicated treasure for the next COMBAT.
   If treasure ID is:
     *   0...127: all the items from that list are added.
     * 128...254: <treasureID> minus 128 random magical items are added.
     *       255: no items are added.

28 ROB <isWholeParty> <percentMoney> <itemChance>
   Takes money and items away.
   * If <isWholeParty> is 0, affects only the current character;
   * If <isWholeParty> is 1, affects all characters.

   All affected characters always lose <percentMoney>% money.

   For <itemChance>, consider every item:
   * If item is less than 2.5 pounds, <itemChance>% chance of loss
   * If item is 2.5 to 25.5 pounds, (<itemChance> - 50)% chance of loss
   * If item is more than 25.5 pounds, (<itemChance> - 90)% chance of loss
   You can't lose a medium item if <itemChance> is below 50, and you can't
   lose a heavy item if <itemChance> is below 90.

   The logic for robbing items has multiple problems:
   * There is no check to see if the item is equipped; there's nothing stopping
     a sword from getting stolen right out of your hand.
   * For each character, itemChance is reduced for a medium or heavy item, and
     is not restored until the next character.  That means you can dramatically
     reduce the odds of item theft by putting your heaviest items at the top of
     your inventory.

29 ENCOUNTER MENU <monsterID> <distance> <pictureID> <address>
                  <combat> <wait> <flee> <advance> <parley>
                  <message0> <message1> <message2>
                  <movement1> <movement2>
   Starts an encounter with the monster with <monsterID> and <pictureID>,
   starting <distance> squares away.  The messages displayed in the text box
   are for the given distance from the party; if no message is defined, the
   message for lower distance is used.

   <combat>, <wait>, <flee>, <advance>, <parley> all define the monsters'
   response if you choose that action:
     0 combat
     1 do whatever you chose (monsters will always wait if you do)
     2 monsters flee (unless you attacked them; the monsters will only escape
       the party if <movement2> is greater than your fastest party member)
     3 monsters advance
     4 parley
   Your party does not "F"lee unless you choose to do so, which succeeds if
   the movement of your slowest party member is at least <movement1>.

   If the party successfully advanced, the menu is repeated.

   The resolution is placed at <address>:
     0 monsters flee
     1 combat begins
     2 party flees
     3 parley

2A GETTABLE <address1> <var> <address2>
   Retrieves the value from address <address1 + var> and places it at
   <address2>.  Equivalent to retrieving a value from an array.

2B HORIZONTAL MENU <address> <count> <stringVarargs>
   Similar to VERTICAL MENU, but the message to the player must be printed
   beforehand, and the string choices are displayed on the bottom menu bar.
   The player can additionally select an option with the first letter of the
   string.

   Scripted "Press <enter>/<return> to continue" prompts use this in earlier
   Gold Box games.  "P" will work for these prompts; an address must still be
   supplied, which can cause bugs.

2C PARLAY [sic] <haughty> <sly> <nice> <meek> <abusive> <address>
   Gives the player the option to choose a parley attitude; the value
   defined for the chosen option is placed at <address>.

2D CALL <address>
   Re-interprets <address> as a function (on an 8-bit system this might be an
   actual direct machine code subroutine call); none of these addresses are
   otherwise valid in the GBVM.  Recognized <address> values:
   $2C90 redraw first-person view
   $8000 character vs. clone duel setup
   $8001 character vs. monsters fight setup
   $BA03 play sound effect 10 (if GBVM $03DE is 8) or 11 (if it is 10)
   $C018 refresh GBVM $C04E current wall
   $C01E move 1 square forward (barriers are ignored), wrapping around and
         refreshing current event and wall

   Any other <address> results in a no-op.

2E DAMAGE <attack> <dice> <sides> <bonus> <var>
   This does damage equal to <dice>d<sides> + <bonus>.
   If bit 128 of <attack> is not set:
     This executes <attack> physical attacks on random characters, with a THAC0
     of (60 - <var>).  Damage is rerolled for every character.
   If bit 128 of <attack> is set, damage is only rolled once:
     Who gets damaged depends on <attack> bit 64:
     * If set, the entire party takes damage.
     * If not set, but <var> bit 128 is, a random character takes damage.
     * Otherwise, the currently chosen character takes damage.

     A saving throw is not allowed if:
     * the entire party was attacked *and* <attack> bit 32 is set; or
     * the current character is attacked (not randomly) and the specified save
       type is vs. paralyzation, poison or death.
     Otherwise, a saving throw to avoid all damage is, with a bonus of <attack>
     lower 5 bits, of type <var> lower 3 bits:
       0 saving throw vs. paralyzation, poison or death
       1 saving throw vs. petrification or polymorph
       2 saving throw vs. rod, staff or wand
       3 saving throw vs. breath weapon
       4 saving throw vs. spell

2F AND <var1> <var2> <address>
   The result of a bitwise AND on <var1> and <var2> is placed at <address>.
   This is used to read bit flags.  Comparison flags are also set up for a
   subsequent IF = or IF <>.

30 OR <var1> <var2> <address>
   The result of a bitwise OR on <var1> and <var2> is placed at <address>.
   This is used to set bit flags, though ADD is also used.  Comparison flags
   are also set up for a subsequent IF = or IF <>; I can't think of any script
   that actually does this, though that is normal in machine code.

31 SPRITE OFF

32 FIND ITEM <itemID>
   This checks all party members for an item with the given <itemID> for a
   subsequent IF.  Only IF = and IF <> are supported.

33 PRINT RETURN
   Prints a single blank line to the message box.

34 ECL CLOCK <var>
   Never actually used.  Time passes, always in minutes (unlike later games).
   The number of minutes should be <var>, but instead uses the index of an
   uninitialized uint8.  (Fixed and used in Curse of the Azure Bonds.)

35 SAVE TABLE <var1> <address> <var2>
   Reverse of GETTABLE; places <var1> at <address + var2>.  Equivalent to
   storing a value in an array.

36 ADD NPC <monsterID> <morale>
   Adds the given monster to your party, with the indicated <morale>.  NPC is
   designated friendly, with the hardcoded exception of LEVEL 6 MU (#24).

37 LOAD PIECES <walldefID> <unknown> <unknown>
   Loads 3D map graphics.

38 PROGRAM <program>
   Runs a special routine depending on <program>:
     0 training hall (using the class bitmask in $6DA8)
     8 win game
     9 camp
   Any other <program> is a no-op.

39 WHO <message>
   Shows <message> and has the player select a party member, who also gets
   LOAD CHARACTER executed.

3A DELAY

3B SPELL <spellID> <address1> <address2>
   In principle, searches for a character with the given spell:
   * if no such character exists: <address1> will hold 255;
   * if such a character does exist:
     <address1> will hold the index of the spell slot;
     <address2> will hold the index of the character;
     also, a LOAD CHARACTER <address2> command is executed.
   In practice, this opcode is always a no-op.  (Fixed in Curse of the Azure
   Bonds.)

3C PROTECTION <address>
   Prints a runic phrase from <address>.

3D CLEAR BOX
   Clears the message window.

SECTION 12.4.1 - Script Flag List
---------------------------------

The game scripts use 256 16-bit flags ($4A00...4AFF in the game scripts) to
hold most non-character game state.  They are typically treated as unsigned
8-bit integers, even though they are effectively 16-bit bytes.

$4A00...4A1F are reset to 0 every time a new ECL script is loaded.
$4A20...4AFF are not automatically reset; sometimes the game scripts do.

An asterisk after the address means that GBVM address has special hardcoded
handling outside of any ECL script.

In the save file (SAVGAM?.DAT; ? is the letter of the save), $4A00 corresponds
to 0x201 in the save file.  So to convert the below addresses to save file
addresses:
  (1) subtract 0x4A00
  (2) multiply by 2
  (3) add 0x201

$4A00 Shared flag:
      Slums: 255 got message from entering map
      Sokal Keep 1: 255 destroyed elf skeleton
      Mendor's Library 2: 1 philosophy section entered
      Kovel Mansion T3: 1 trap encountered
      Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 13: 1 found book
      Stojanow Gate 9: 1 encountered man with wagon
      Valjevo Castle Inner Tower 7: 1 Genheeris's office entered
$4A01 Shared flag:
      Civilized Area 2: 1 party now allowed to board boat
      Podal Plaza: number of base monsters in random encounter
      Mendor's Library 3: 1 mathematics section entered
      Kovel Mansion T4: 1 trap encountered
      Kobold Caves 1: 1 dealt with pit
      Buccaneer Base: 1 saw heir to Bivant
      Valhingen Graveyard: count of new random skeletons for current visit
      Stojanow Gate:
        bit 1 location 1 entered
        bit 2 location 2 entered
$4A02 Shared flag:
      Podal Plaza: random encounter base monster ID
      Mendor's Library 4: 1 history section entered
      Kovel Mansion T5: 1 trap encountered
      Temple of Bane 7: 1 destroyed altar to Bane
      Cadorna Textile House 5: 255 hobgoblins defeated
      Kobold Caves 2: 1 found kobold's drawing
      Valhingen Graveyard: count of new random zombies for current visit
$4A03 Shared flag:
      Sokal Keep: random encounter counter
      Podal Plaza: random encounter number of monster leaders
      Mendor's Library 5: 1 rhetoric section entered
      Kovel Mansion T6: 1 trap encountered
      Kobold Caves 3:
        1 kobold escorts party
        2 deadfall trap disarmed
      Buccaneer Base 6: 255 purchased pass
      Valhingen Graveyard: number of wights in next random encounter
$4A04 Shared flag:
      Slums 3 Ohlo's quest:
        250 agreed to retrieve potion
        255 returned potion
      Podal Plaza: random encounter index
      Mendor's Location 8:
        1 entered
        2 found jar under floorboards
      Kovel Mansion T7: 1 trap encountered
      Kobold Caves 4: 1 dealt with net trap
      Buccaneer Base 10: 255 animals released
$4A05 Shared flag:
      Civilized Area 14: 1 met arena master during this visit
      Sokal Keep 11: 1 chapel entered
      Mendor's Library:
        bit 1 location 6 entered
        bit 2 location 7 entered
      Cadorna Textile House 13: 255 destroyed body of hobgoblin
      Kovel Mansion T8: 1 trap encountered
      Kobold Caves 5: 1 dealt with spike trap
      Buccaneer Base 10: timer for releasing animals (counts up to 60)
      Valhingen Graveyard: count of new skeletons for current visit
$4A06 Shared flag:
      Sokal Keep 6: 1 blacksmith entered
      Mendor's Library 9: 1 entered
      Cadorna Textile House 3: 255 entered
      Valhingen Graveyard: count of new zombies for current visit
$4A07 Shared flag:
      Civilized Area: 1 fought city hall guards
      Sokal Keep 5: 1 fungus room entered
      Mendor's Library 10: 1 entered
      Kovel Mansion: backstab switch
$4A08 Shared flag:
      Slums 5: 250 got message
      Sokal Keep 10: 1 entered
      Mendor's Library 12: 1 study entered
      Podal Plaza: random encounter monster movement
      Cadorna Textile House 14: 255 entered
      Valhingen Graveyard 15: 1 spectre can appear in current visit
$4A09 Shared flag:
      Sokal Keep 13: 1 entered
      Mendor's Library 14: 1 entered
      Cadorna Textile House 16: 255 entered
      Valhingen Graveyard: count of new random wights for current visit
$4A0A Shared flag:
      Mendor's Library 15: 1 entered
      Podal Plaza: random encounter monster morale
      Valhingen Graveyard 18: 1 spectre can appear in current visit
$4A0B Shared flag:
      Slums 8: 255 killed gypsy
      Sokal Keep 8: 255 huge scorpions defeated
      Mendor's Library 16: 1 entered
      Valhingen Graveyard 22: 1 spectre can appear in current visit
$4A0C Shared flag:
      Mendor's Library 18: 1 entered
      Cadorna Textile House 4: 255 entered
$4A0D Shared flag:
      Sokal Keep 4: 1 stable entered
      Valhingen Graveyard 18: 1 zombie-generating spectre defeated
$4A0E Shared flag:
      Sokal Keep 6: 255 poisonous frogs defeated
      Wealthy Area/Temple of Bane: 1 encountering special 4-orc patrol
      Kobold Caves 13: 1 found crude map (Journal Entry 28)
      Zhentil Keep Outpost 3: 1 attacked guards outside room before dinner
      Valhingen Graveyard 3: 1 skeletons defeated
$4A0F Shared flag:
      Slums 11: 255 entered
      Kuto's Well Catacombs 13:
        250 treasure available (Norris the Gray defeated)
        255 treasure found
      Cadorna Textile House 23: 1 diary page found
      Temple of Bane:
        1 orc guards defeated
        2 leaving temple
      Kobold Caves 15: 1 entered
      Zhentil Keep Outpost: 1 dwarf fighter defeated
$4A10 Shared flag:
      Kuto's Well/Kuto's Well Catacombs: 1 in catacombs
      Buccaneer Base 5: 1 purchased heir to Bivant
      Zhentil Keep Outpost 3: 1 night after dinner
      Valhingen Graveyard 19: 1 mummies defeated
$4A11 Shared flag:
      Civilized Area 20: 1 currently in tavern
      Buccaneer Base 11: slave pen guards defeated
      Kobold Caves 19: 1 entered
$4A12 Shared flag:
      Kuto's Well Catacombs 9: 255 arrows fired by kobolds
      Kobold Caves 21: 1 entered
      Valhingen Graveyard 14: 1 took noxious fumes damage
$4A13 Shared flag:
      Sokal Keep 12: 255 encountered Ferran Martinez
      Kuto's Well Catacombs 10: 255 arrows fired by kobolds
      Kovel Mansion trap:
        0 trap set off
        1 nothing done with trap
        2 trap disarmed
      Kobold Caves 22: 1 entered
      Buccaneer Base E: 1 main gate guards defeated
      Zhentil Keep Outpost 6: 1 dinner over
      Valhingen Graveyard 15: 1 skeleton-generating spectre defeated
$4A14 Shared flag:
      Slums 16: 255 entered
      Kuto's Well Catacombs 11: 255 arrows fired by kobolds
      Zhentil Keep Outpost 3: count of guards defeated after first wave
      Valhingen Graveyard 22: 1 wight-generating spectre defeated
$4A15 Shared flag:
      Kovel Mansion: 14 trap disarmed
      Wilderness: 1 resting
      Valhingen Graveyard 28: 1 vampire defeated 1st time
$4A16 Shared flag:
      Slums: adjustable monster morale
      Kovel Mansion 15: 255 pair of thieves encountered
$4A17 Shared flag:
      Slums: 255 Old Rope Guild entered
      Cadorna Textile House 24: 1 treasure opened
      Zhentil Keep Outpost: alarm counter
$4A18 Shared flag
      Wealthy Area/Temple of Bane: number of regular monsters
      Zhentil Keep Outpost: 128 escorted inside
      Valhingen Graveyard 23: spectres defeated
$4A19 Shared flag:
      Slums 19: 255 merchant is gone
      Sokal Keep: 1 gave password to undead patrol
      Kuto's Well 20: 255 encountered kobolds
      Podal Plaza: orc priest timer
      Kovel Mansion 16: 1 thief ambush defeated
      Zhentil Keep Outpost 6: 1 discussed Bishop Braccio
$4A1A Shared flag:
      Kuto's Well: 200 rest interrupted
      Buccaneer Base: random combat counter
      Zhentil Keep Outpost 6: 1 discussed Tyranthraxus
$4A1B Shared flag:
      Wealthy Area/Temple of Bane: number of monster leaders
      Buccaneer Base: 1 killed captain
      Zhentil Keep Outpost 6: 1 discussed Pool of Radiance
      Valhingen Graveyard: used to calculate number of skeletons/zombies/wights
$4A1C Shared flag:
      Zhentil Keep Outpost 6: 1 discussed Ulrich Eberhard
      Valhingen Graveyard 21: 1 took stinging damage
$4A1D Shared flag:
      Slums 19: 1 attacked merchant
      Zhentil Keep Outpost 6 discussion counter
$4A1E 1 Zhentil Keep Outpost E1: attacked by guards in commotion
$4A1F 255 Kuto's Well Catacombs 6 found secret door
$4A20 unused
$4A21 255 Sokal Keep 17 treasure taken
$4A22 1-10 Kuto's Well random encounter counter
      255 Kuto's Well cleared (set to this if this value reaches 10)
$4A23 bit 1 Kuto's Well kobolds guarding well defeated
      bit 2 Kuto's Well 22 hag gave advice
      bit 4 Kuto's Well 22 treasure taken
      bit 8 Kuto's Well 21 lizardman and giant lizards defeated
      bit 16 Kuto's Well 21 door forced open
$4A24 255 Norris the Gray encountered
$4A25 unknown (checked in Sokal Keep, but never set anywhere)
$4A26 255 Sokal Keep 12 dealt with Ferran Martinez
$4A27 255 Sokal Keep diary location known
$4A28 255 Sokal Keep 15 treasure found
$4A29 255 Sokal Keep 16 treasure taken
$4A2A 1 Wealthy Area/Temple of Bane encountered and did not fight 4-orc patrol
$4A2B unused
$4A2C unused
$4A2D bit 1 Temple of Bane 1 treasure taken
      bit 2 Temple of Bane 2 treasure taken
      bit 4 Temple of Bane 3 treasure taken
$4A2E bit 1 Wealthy Area 1 treasure taken
      bit 2 Wealthy Area 2 treasure taken
      bit 4 Wealthy Area 3 treasure taken
      bit 8 Wealthy Area 4 treasure taken
      bit 16 Wealthy Area 6 ogre and orcs defeated
      bit 32 Wealthy Area 7 entered
$4A2F bit 1 Mendor's Library 2 found Fyerdeth's Discourses on Power
      bit 2 Mendor's Library 2 found Urgund's Description of Darkness
      bit 4 Mendor's Library 4 found Lex Geographica
      bit 8 Mendor's Library 4 found The History of the North
      bit 16 Mendor's Library 4 found The Grand Historian's Records of the Arts
        of War
      bit 32 Mendor's Library 8 found potions of extra healing
      bit 64 Mendor's Library 13 found manual of bodily health
      bit 128 Mendor's Library 2 found at least one nearly worthless book
$4A30 Mendor's Library 2 nearly worthless book discovery counter (max 5)
$4A31 bit 1 Mendor's Library 11 mad man encountered
      bit 2 Mendor's Library 11 mad man joined
      bit 4 Mendor's Library 14 eastern gold sheets found
      bit 8 Mendor's Library 14 western gold sheets found
      bit 16 Mendor's Library 14 southern gold sheets found
      bit 32 Mendor's Library E3 spectre defeated
      bit 64 Mendor's Library 5 basilisk defeated
      bit 128 Mendor's Library 18 kobolds encountered
$4A32 Mendor's Library 1 green slime counter
$4A33 unused
$4A34 1-10 Podal Plaza random encounter counter (not incremented if >=64)
      bit 64: Podal Plaza entered while on mission
$4A35 Podal Plaza mission tracker:
        0 not yet begun
        1 chose "Disguise Party as Monsters"
        2 chose "Sneak, Remaining Unseen"
        254 auction ended
        255 chose "Stride Boldly Forward" or lost stealth; or mission done
$4A36 Podal Plaza rumor counter (max 4)
$4A37 Podal Plaza 2 tavern tracker:
        1 killed buccaneer
        2 fought tavern patrons
        3 tavern abandoned
$4A38 Podal Plaza 6 orc priest of Bane tracker:
        1 talked to orc priest
        2 fought orc priest
$4A39 Valhingen Graveyard Skeleton Kill Score
$4A3A Valhingen Graveyard Zombie Kill Score
$4A3B Valhingen Graveyard Wight Kill Score
$4A3C Valhingen Graveyard Spectre Kill Score
$4A3D 1 Valhingen Graveyard 8 juju zombie defeated
$4A3E 1 Valhingen Graveyard 5 giant skeleton defeated
$4A3F 1 Valhingen Graveyard 12 wraith defeated
$4A40 unused
$4A41 250 Valhingen Graveyard 28 vampire defeated 1st time
      255 Valhingen Graveyard 25 vampire defeated 2nd time
$4A42 bit 1 if <= 3 Valhingen Graveyard 22 spectre defeated at least once
      bit 2 if <= 3 Valhingen Graveyard 23 spectres defeated at least once
      250 Valhingen Graveyard 26 mage joined
      255 Valhingen Graveyard mage or vampire defeated
$4A43 251 Valhingen Graveyard 25 coffin sanctified
$4A44 bit 1 Wealthy Area 9 orcs defeated
      bit 2 Wealthy Area 10 orcs defeated
$4A45 Kovel Mansion count of thieves killed
$4A46 bit 1 Kovel Mansion 13 casket A opened
      bit 2 Kovel Mansion 13 casket B opened
      bit 4 Kovel Mansion 13 casket C opened
      bit 8 Kovel Mansion 13 casket D opened
$4A47 bit 1 Kovel Mansion 9 treasure found
      bit 4 Kovel Mansion 11 treasure found
      bit 8 Kovel Mansion 12 treasure found
      bit 32 Kovel Mansion 14 treasure found
$4A48 bit 1 Kovel Mansion 17 entered
      bit 2 Kovel Mansion 18 thieves defeated
      bit 4 Kovel Mansion 19 entered
      bit 8 Kovel Mansion 20 entered
$4A49 255 Valhingen Graveyard 5 treasure taken
$4A4A 255 Valhingen Graveyard 28 treasure taken
$4A4B bit 128 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 12 hole created in wall
$4A4C bit 1 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 south wandering stirges defeated
      bit 2 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 south wandering driders defeated
      bit 4 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 south wandering minotaurs defeated
      bit 8 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 south wandering elves defeated
      bit 16 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 south wandering kobolds defeated
      bit 32 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 south wandering human fighters defeated
$4A4D Yarash's Pyramid bit flags for rocks thrown through teleporters
$4A4E bit 1 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 north wandering human fighters defeated
      bit 2 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 north wandering displacer beasts defeated
      bit 4 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 north wandering dwarf fighters defeated
      bit 8 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 north wandering lizardmen defeated
      bit 16 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 north wandering thieves defeated
      bit 32 Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 north wandering driders defeated
$4A4F Yarash's Pyramid Levels 2 and 3 bit flags for secret doors
$4A50 Yarash's Pyramid Level 3 26 dial setting:
        0 blue
        1 copper
        2 silver
        3 gold
$4A51 bit 1 Yarash's Pyramid Level 2 6 lizardmen encountered
      bit 2 Yarash's Pyramid Level 2 8 entered
      bit 4 Yarash's Pyramid Level 2 10 entered
      bit 8 Yarash's Pyramid Level 2 17 mutant lizardmen defeated
      bit 16 Yarash's Pyramid Level 2 1 entered
      bit 32 Yarash's Pyramid Level 2 18 found notebook
      bit 64 Yarash's Pyramid Level 3 22 survived copy protection monster
      bit 128 Yarash's Pyramid Level 3 23 machinery destroyed
$4A52 bit 1 Yarash's Pyramid Level 3 24 friendly resolution with lizardmen
      bit 2 Yarash's Pyramid Level 3 24 hostile resolution with lizardmen
      bit 4 Yarash's Pyramid Level 3 25 Yarash defeated
      bit 8 Yarash's Pyramid Level 3 19 treasure found
      bit 16 Yarash's Pyramid Level 3 20 treasure found
      bit 32 Yarash's Pyramid Level 3 21 treasure found
      bit 64 Yarash's Pyramid Level 3 27 entered
      bit 128 Yarash's Pyramid Level 3 27 searched
$4A53...4A58 unused
$4A59 unknown (set in Zhentil Keep Outpost, but never checked anywhere)
$4A5A 1 Zhentil Keep Outpost 5 defeated
$4A5B unused
$4A5C unused
$4A5D Lizardman Keep lizardman kill counter (max 50)
$4A5E bit 1 Lizardman Keep Catacombs P1 treasure found
      bit 2 Lizardman Keep Catacombs P2 treasure found
      bit 4 Lizardman Keep Catacombs P3 treasure found
      bit 8 Lizardman Keep Catacombs P4 treasure found
      bit 16 Lizardman Keep Catacombs P5 treasure found
      bit 32 Lizardman Keep Catacombs P6 treasure found
      bit 64 Lizardman Keep Catacombs P7 treasure found
      bit 128 Lizardman Keep Catacombs P8 treasure found
$4A5F Lizardman Keep giant lizard kill counter (doesn't work right)
$4A60 bit 1 Lizardman Keep 16 treasure found
      bit 2 Lizardman Keep 1 lizardmen and giant lizard defeated
      bit 4 Lizardman Keep 10 lizardmen and giant lizards defeated
      bit 8 Lizardman Keep 3 giant lizards defeated
$4A61 bit 1 Lizardman Keep P first time visiting any pool
      bit 2 Lizardman Keep 1 storeroom entered
      bit 4 Lizardman Keep 10 central keep entered
      bit 8 Lizardman Keep 3 servants' quarters entered
$4A62 Valjevo Castle hour that alarm started to ring
$4A63 Valjevo Castle minute that alarm started to ring
$4A64 Valjevo Castle hour that alarm will stop ringing (0 if none, 24 for 0)
$4A65 bit 1 Valjevo Castle 1 party successfully disguised
      bit 2 Valjevo Castle 20 mess hall entered
      bit 4 Valjevo Castle 17 dealt with hill giants
      bit 8 Valjevo Castle 18 treasure found
      bit 16 Valjevo Castle 16 fire giants defeated
      bit 32 Valjevo Castle 14 long sword +2 flame tongue taken
      bit 64 Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze 5 false Tyranthraxus gone
      bit 128 Valjevo Castle 7 hill giants defeated
$4A66 bit 2 Valjevo Castle 13 Cadorna following party
      bit 4 Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze 1 Al-Hyam Dazid gone
      bit 8 Valjevo Castle 9 fighter defeated
      bit 16 Valjevo Castle 21 fire giants defeated
      bit 32 Valjevo Castle 22 read paper with passwords
      bit 64 Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze 6 trolls defeated
      bit 128 Valjevo Castle 24 gnoll killed
$4A67 bit 1 Valjevo Castle 1 talked to gnoll
      bit 2 Valjevo Castle 26 officers defeated
      bit 4 Valjevo Castle 26 entered at night
      bit 8 Valjevo Castle 26 read Cadorna report
      bit 16 Valjevo Castle 26 read flaming aura report
      bit 32 Valjevo Castle 26 read barbarian report
      bit 64 Valjevo Castle 21 got passwords from fire giants
$4A68 Valjevo Castle 25 report reading counter
$4A69 bit 1 Valjevo Castle 1 washerwomen killed
      bit 2 Valjevo Castle 1 got disguise from washerwomen
      bit 4 Valjevo Castle 2 treasure taken
      bit 8 Valjevo Castle 2 smith and fire giants defeated
      bit 16 Valjevo Castle 3 coal storeroom entered
      bit 32 Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze 3 hill giants defeated
      bit 64 Valjevo Castle 4 smokehouse entered
      bit 128 Valjevo Castle 10 clerics of Bane defeated
$4A6A bit 1 Valjevo Castle 11 altar of Bane took silver
      bit 2 Valjevo Castle 11 altar of Bane took swords
      bit 4 Valjevo Castle 10 temple of Bane discovered as impostor
      bit 8 Valjevo Castle 10 temple of Bane conversation flag
      bit 16 Valjevo Castle 27 deserted building entered
      bit 32 Valjevo Castle 12 building with ceiling cave-in entered
      bit 64 Valjevo Castle E6 (Northwest) guards suspicious
      bit 128 Valjevo Castle E6 (Southeast) guards suspicious
$4A6B bit 1 Valjevo Castle 5a hill giants defeated
      bit 2 Valjevo Castle 5b hill giants defeated
      bit 4 Valjevo Castle 5c hill giants defeated
      bit 8 completed commission #13 (Zhentil Keep Outpost)
      bit 16 Valjevo Castle 13 Cadorna released
      bit 32 Valjevo Castle 13 Cadorna killed
      bit 64 Valjevo Castle 15 defeated
      bit 128 Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze 2 fire giants defeated
$4A6C bit 1 Valjevo Castle 6a gold found
      bit 2 Valjevo Castle 6b gold found
      bit 4 Valjevo Castle 6c gold found
      bit 8 Valjevo Castle Inner Tower secret door flag
      bit 16 Valjevo Castle Inner Tower 5 medusa defeated
      bit 32 Valjevo Castle Inner Tower 6 messenger defeated
      bit 64 Valjevo Castle Inner Tower 6 messenger called away
$4A6D bit 1 Valjevo Castle Inner Tower 7 Genheeris joined
      bit 2 Valjevo Castle Inner Tower 7 Genheeris killed
      bit 4 Valjevo Castle Inner Tower 8 level 8 fighters defeated
      bit 8 Valjevo Castle Inner Tower 8 entered
      bit 16 Valjevo Castle Inner Tower 8 Tyranthraxus defeated
$4A6E...4A71 unused
$4A72 unused (mistakenly set in Valjevo Castle Inner Tower; never checked)
$4A73 128 Cadorna Textile House 17 Skullcrusher freed
      255 Cadorna Textile House 17 Skullcrusher no longer here
$4A74 1 Cadorna Textile House 1 circumvented or defeated
      2 Cadorna Textile House 18 Grishnak defeated
$4A75 255 Cadorna Textile House 21 ogre leading hobgoblins defeated
$4A76 unused
$4A77 bit 1 Stojanow Gate 12 entered facing south
      bit 2 Stojanow Gate 13 entered facing south
      bit 4 Stojanow Gate 1 western guard tower defeated
      bit 8 Stojanow Gate 2 eastern guard tower defeated
      bit 16 Stojanow Gate bugbears defeated
      bit 32 Stojanow Gate 4 entered
      bit 64 Stojanow Gate 9 acquired wagon
$4A78 Stojanow Gate bugbear attitude:
        0 not suspicious
        1 less suspicious
        2 more suspicious
        3 hostile
$4A79...4A7B unused
$4A7C*bit 1 Nomad Camp accepted offer of hospitality, quest is ongoing
      bit 2 Nomad Camp fighting nomads
      bit 4 Nomad Camp defeated Hassad or the kobolds
      bit 8 Nomad Camp received Hassad's treasure
$4A7D Nomad Camp feast tracker:
        1 awaiting feast
        2 feast ongoing
        3 feast over
$4A7E Nomad Camp kobold encounter counter (max 3)
$4A7F Nomad Camp nomad encounter counter (max 3)
$4A80 Slums random encounter and gypsy counter
$4A81 Slums Ohlo quest tracker:
        250 merchant gave potion
        255 took potion back to Ohlo
$4A82 unused
$4A83 255 Slums 16 treasure found
$4A84 unused
$4A85 255 Slums 6 defeated
$4A86 unused
$4A87 bit 1 Diogenes asks you to retrieve the efreeti bottle
      bit 2 Diogenes sees the efreeti bottle
      bit 128 Diogenes upset because you tried to attack him
$4A88 255 Valhingen Graveyard 8 treasure taken
$4A89 255 Valhingen Graveyard 12 treasure taken
$4A8A unused
$4A8B 128 Buccaneer Base heir to Bivant abandoned
      255 Buccaneer Base base captured
$4A8C*255 Received heir to Bivant commission
$4A8D 1 Kobold Caves 9 wave 1 defeated
      2 Kobold Caves 9 reached wave 2
      3 Kobold Caves 9 reached wave 3
      4 Kobold Caves 9 wave 3 defeated
      5 Kobold Caves 20 kobold king guards defeated
      6 Kobold Caves 11 found dead kobold king
      7 Kobold Caves 27 treasure found
$4A8E 1 Kobold Caves 17 wyvern defeated
      2 Kobold Caves 26 treasure found
$4A8F...4A95 Valhingen Graveyard undead kill reward trackers
$4A96 255 Valhingen Graveyard mission accepted
$4A97 254 Asked to talk to Cadorna about Cadorna Textile House mission
      255 Cadorna Textile House mission received
$4A98 254 Asked to talk to Cadorna about Zhentil Keep diplomatic mission
      255 Zhentil Keep diplomatic mission received
$4A99 254 Asked to talk to Werner von Urslingen
      255 Stojanow Gate mission received
$4A9A 254 Asked to talk to entire council
      255 Valjevo Castle mission received
$4A9B 254 Asked to talk to Bishop Braccio
$4A9C 128 Temple of Bane mission received
      255 Dirten joined the party
$4A9D unused
$4A9E 255 Wilderness entered lair
$4A9F*1 Wilderness found Nomad Camp
$4AA0*bit 1 Wilderness found Lizardman Keep
      bit 2 Wilderness found Kobold Caves
$4AA1 1 Wilderness saw Diogenes from afar
      255 Wilderness saw Diogenes fly into cave
$4AA2*255 Wilderness left Yarash's Pyramid after clearing it
$4AA3...4AA5 unused
$4AA6 254 Norris the Gray defeated
      255 Norris the Gray defeat rewarded
$4AA7 254 Sokal Keep 12 dealt with Ferran Martinez
      255 Sokal Keep mission rewarded for success
$4AA8 254 Wealthy Area cleared
      255 Wealthy Area clear rewarded
$4AA9 Buccaneer Base heir to Bivant mission tracker:
        1 heir to Bivant purchased
        128 mission failed
        254 heir to Bivant stolen
        255 mission ended
$4AAA 254 found Fyerdeth's Discourses on Power
      255 rewarded for finding Fyerdeth's Discourses on Power
$4AAB 254 found Urgund's Description of Darkness
      255 rewarded for finding Urgund's Description of Darkness
$4AAC 254 found Lex Geographica
      255 rewarded for finding Lex Geographica
$4AAD 254 found The History of the North
      255 rewarded for finding The History of the North
$4AAE 254 found The Grand Historian's Records of the Arts of War
      255 rewarded for finding The Grand Historian's Records of the Arts of War
$4AAF 254 found one of the other nearly worthless books in Mendor's Library
      255 rewarded for finding one of the other nearly worthless books
$4AB0 1 Podal Plaza mission received
      254 Podal Plaza mission successful
      255 Podal Plaza mission rewarded for success
$4AB1 254 Valhingen Graveyard mission successful
      255 Valhingen Graveyard mission rewarded for success
$4AB2 254 Kovel Mansion mission successful (set if $4A45 >= 21)
      255 Kovel Mansion mission rewarded for success
$4AB3*254 Yarash mission successful
      255 Yarash mission rewarded for success
$4AB4 1 Zhentil Keep Outpost defeated commandant
      253 Left Zhentil Keep Outpost after defeating commandant
      254 Returned from Zhentil Keep Outpost mission
      255 Set to this after council tells you about 254
$4AB5 254 Lizardman mission successful
      255 Lizardman mission rewarded for success
$4AB6 254 Kobold mission successful
      255 Kobold mission rewarded for success
$4AB7 254 Nomad mission successful
      255 Nomad mission rewarded for success
$4AB8 254 Cadorna treasure returned
      255 Cadorna treasure mission ended
$4AB9 254 Stojanow Gate mission successful
      255 Stojanow Gate mission rewarded for success
$4ABA 254 Tyranthraxus defeated
      255 Tyranthraxus defeat rewarded
$4ABB 1-25 Counter for Slums random and set encounters
      254 Slums mission successful (set to this if this value reaches 25)
      255 Slums mission rewarded for success
$4ABC unused
$4ABD 254 Temple of Bane mission successful
      255 Temple of Bane mission rewarded for success
$4ABE 254 Zhentil Keep Outpost mission success, or Cadorna proved as traitor
      255 Zhentil Keep Outpost mission rewarded for success
$4ABF 254 Porphyrys Cadorna killed
      255 Porphyrys Cadorna killed acknowledged
$4AC0 1 angered Phlan
$4AC1 Council reward quest tracker (maximum 10, only some quests count)
$4AC2 255 Mendor's Library mission rewarded for success
$4AC3 unused
$4AC4 Civilized Area boat trip destination:
        0 Sokal Keep
        1 East Wilderness (35,29)
        2 West Wilderness (20,29)
        3 Bay (26,27)
        4 none
$4AC5 1 Civilized Area met Rolf
$4AC6 unknown (set in Civilized Area, but never checked anywhere)
$4AC7 2 Kobold Caves 6 killed kobold
      255 Kobold Caves used large entrance to enter
$4AC8 1 Cadorna treasure acquired (seal intact)
      128 Cadorna treasure acquired (seal broken)
      255 Cadorna treasure returned or Civilized Area 27 encountered
$4AC9 unused
$4ACA 255 Slums 1 orcs defeated
$4ACB 255 Slums 2 goblin leader and goblin guards defeated
$4ACC 255 Slums 5 treasure found
$4ACD 255 Slums 9 orc leaders and orcs defeated
$4ACE 250 Slums 10 hobgoblins defeated
      255 Slums 10 treasure found
$4ACF 255 Slums 13 orc leaders and orcs defeated
$4AD0 255 Slums 14 ogre, gnolls, and hobgoblin leaders defeated
$4AD1 unused
$4AD2*1 Nomad Camp left nomads prematurely
$4AD3 1 Kobold Caves 12 encountered efreeti
$4AD4 1 Kobold Caves 14 Princess Fatima no longer present
$4AD5 255 Valhingen Graveyard assisted by efreeti
$4AD6 255 Slums 12 treasure found
$4AD7 255 Sokal Keep 9 orcs and hobgoblins defeated
$4AD8 255 Slums 15 goblin leaders and goblin guards defeated
$4AD9 255 Slums 20 ogres and trolls defeated
$4ADA unused
$4ADB Kuto's Well well status
$4ADC...4ADF unused
$4AE0 1 running "game won" script
$4AE1 255 Cadorna Textile House 2 hobgoblins defeated
$4AE2 255 Cadorna Textile House 6 entered
$4AE3 255 Cadorna Textile House 8 hobgoblins defeated
$4AE4 Cadorna Textile House random combat counter (maximum 10)
$4AE5 1 Kobold Caves 18 found kobold
$4AE6 254 Cadorna Textile House cleared
      255 Cadorna Textile House clear rewarded
$4AE7 254 Podal Plaza cleared
      255 Podal Plaza clear rewarded
$4AE8 unused
$4AE9 unused
$4AEA Kovel Mansion 10 cabinet A:
        1 opened
        2 failed to pick lock
        3 left
$4AEB Kovel Mansion 10 cabinet B: as $4AEA
$4AEC Kovel Mansion 10 cabinet C: as $4AEA
$4AED Kovel Mansion 12: as $4AEA
$4AEE Kovel Mansion 13 casket A: as $4AEA
$4AEF Kovel Mansion 13 casket B: as $4AEA
$4AF0 Kovel Mansion 13 casket C: as $4AEA
$4AF1 Kovel Mansion 13 casket D: as $4AEA
$4AF2 1 Valhingen Graveyard 13 skeletons defeated
      11 Valhingen Graveyard 5 giant skeleton defeated
$4AF3 1 Valhingen Graveyard 16 zombies defeated
      11 Valhingen Graveyard 8 juju zombie defeated
$4AF4 1 Valhingen Graveyard 10 wights defeated
      10 Valhingen Graveyard 12 wraith defeated
$4AF5 1 Valhingen Graveyard 13 skeletons defeated
$4AF6 1 Valhingen Graveyard 16 zombies defeated
$4AF7 1 Valhingen Graveyard 20 wights defeated
$4AF8 1 Valhingen Graveyard 24 treasure found
$4AF9...4AFF* unknown

SECTION 12.4.2 - Other Script Addresses
---------------------------------------

These GBVM addresses are also referenced in the ECL scripts.  They are not to
be confused with DS addresses.

A "character" is the current character: either currently selected in the UI,
or specified by the LOAD CHARACTER or WHO commands.

$00B1 unknown
$00B8 unknown
$00B9 unknown
$00FB unknown
$00FC unknown
$033D Direction, including diagonals:
        0 north
        1 northeast
        2 east
        3 southeast
        4 south
        5 southwest
        6 west
        7 northwest
        (in some other contexts, either 8 or 255 mean no direction)
$03DE Sound effect
$49C3 X-coordinate (outdoors)
$49C4 Y-coordinate (outdoors)
$49C5 Map ID
$49C6 Segment of the minute (not ever used)
$49C7 Minute of the turn (minutes ones digit)
$49C8 Turn of the hour (minutes tens digit)
$49C9 Hour of the day
$49CA Day of the month
$49CB Month of the year
$49CC Elapsed years (poorly behaved after 256 years elapse)
$49E5 1 cannot cast spells
$49E6 Outdoors flag (0 = indoors, 1 = outdoors)
$49E7 unknown 3D map graphics variable
$49E8 unknown 3D map graphics variable
$49EB unknown
$49F0 X-coordinate (previous)
$49F1 Y-coordinate (previous)
$49F2 Previous ECL script ID
$49FB 1 Automap will not work
$49FC Game speed
$49FD Color of sky (converted to actual color using DS:0C26 map).  11 is sky
      blue either normally or after map conversion.  I don't know how this
      works on an 8-bit system; 11 defaults to pink on an Apple ][.
$49FE Color of ceiling (converted to actual color using DS:C026 map)
$49FF bit 1 Portraits setting
      bit 2 Monster pics setting
$6B00 Creature name
$6B18 Creature Constitution
$6B20 Creature memorized spell table
$6B9B Creature saving throw vs. petrification or polymorph
$6BA0 Creature hit dice
$6BA5 Creature thief skill: Pick Pocket
$6BA6 Creature thief skill: Open Locks
$6BA7 Creature thief skill: Find/Remove Traps
$6BA8 Creature thief skill: Move Silently
$6BA9 Creature thief skill: Hide in Shadows
$6BAA Creature thief skill: Hear Noise
$6BAB Creature thief skill: Climb Walls
$6BAC Creature thief skill: Read Languages
$6BB8 Morale and NPC status:
        lower 7 bits: morale
        bit 128: set if NPC
$6BBB Creature copper
$6BBD Creature silver
$6BBF Creature electrum
$6BC1 Creature gold
$6BC3 Creature platinum
$6BF7 Creature experience for defeating
$6BF9 Creature bonus experience per hit point for defeating
$6C00 Creature status:
        0 Creature does not exist, is unconscious, or is otherwise out of play
        1 Creature is okay
        128+status Creature has status
$6C0C Creature combat behavior (hostility and autocombat flags combined):
        0 Allied, Controlled
        128 Allied, Uncontrolled
        129 Hostile
$6C19 Creature current hit points
$6C1B Creature movement
$6DA8 Bitmask for classes trainable in a training hall
$6DB1 Currently selected character index
$6DB4 Currently selected character index (duplicate of above)
$6DC0 Requested monster distance (0...2)
$6DC1 Actual monster distance (0...2)
$6DC6 Morale threshold (monsters fail morale check once this % of their
      original maximum hit points are gone; 100 means monsters always fight to
      the death)
$6DC7 Last combat result:
          0 Victory
        128 Total party kill
        129 Ran away
$6DC8 Last combat number of monsters defeated
$6DC9 255 Party cannot change X or Y coordinates by moving
$6DCA bit 1 Search mode on
      bit 2 Searching current square
$6DCB Surprise for next combat:
        0 Neither side surprised
        1 Monsters surprise party
        2 Party surprises monsters
        3 Monsters and party surprise each other
$6DCF Charisma bonus of current character (from Statistic: Charisma table)
$6DD2 Time you may be able to rest uninterrupted (in minutes, divided by 5)
      0 means you cannot be interrupted
$6DD3 % chance rest is interrupted
$6DD5 1 Party to leave current map
$6DE1 Picture loading (255 means none)
$6DE2 1 Party about to enter temple
$6DE3 1 Next combat does not provide any items
$6DE6 1 Next combat is a mirror duel
$6DE9 unknown
$6E12 Disk number
$6E22 Writes to here load WALLDEF#.DAX
$6E24 Writes to here load WALLDEF#.DAX
$6E26 Writes to here load WALLDEF#.DAX
$6E33 1 Party attacked allies during the last fight
$6E3E Party size
$6E6C 1 Party about to enter shop
$6E6D Shop buying price multiplier; 16 is standard.  (The game scripts neither
      ever set any other value, nor would any other value have any effect; this
      does work in all later Gold Box games.)
$6E70 int8 ad hoc combat modifier to monster THAC0
$6E71 int8 ad hoc combat modifier to party THAC0
$6E72 int8 ad hoc combat modifier to party movement
$6EF6 Unknown shop modifier; 1 is standard.  (Not referenced.)
$C059 unknown
$C05F unknown
$C04B 3D map party X-coordinate (current)
$C04C 3D map party Y-coordinate (current)
$C04D Party facing in 3D map:
        0 north
        1 east
        2 south
        3 west
$C04E Wall of current square and facing
$C04F Event number of current square (upper 1...3 bits are often flags)

Some addresses may only be CALLed: $2C90, $8000, $8001, $BA03, $C018, $C01E
(see CALL opcode description for details).

SECTION 12.5 - Save File Format
-------------------------------

The save game procedure first assures the GBVM is up-to-date:
  * DS:6AB2...6AB3 -> GBVM $4AF9
  * DS:6AB6...6AB7 -> GBVM $4AFA
  * DS:6ABA...6ABB -> GBVM $4AFB
  * DS:6AB4...6AB5 -> GBVM $4AFC
  * DS:6AB6...6AB7 -> GBVM $4AFD
  * DS:6ABA...6ABB -> GBVM $4AFE
  * DS:49E2        -> GBVM $49FC
  * DS:49F5        -> GBVM $49FF bit 1
  * DS:49F6        -> GBVM $49FF bit 2
  * DS:5376        -> GBVM $6E12

It then performs the following writes to SAVGAM?.DAT (? is the save letter):
  Bytes  Description
      1  current virtual disk number (should be the same as GBVM $6E12)
   2048  GBVM $4900...4CFF (16-bit bytes)
   2048  GBVM $6B00...6EFF (16-bit bytes)
   1024  GBVM $9700...98FF (16-bit bytes)
   7680  GBVM $9900...B6FF (8-bit bytes)
      5  GBVM $C04B...C04F (8-bit bytes)
      1  DS:49FA party location type
      1  DS:49F3 interface state
      1  party size (should be the same as GBVM $6E3E)
    328  size-8 array of length-40 Strings CHRDAT?# (# is character index)
  -----
  13137

Characters are saved to CHRDAT?#.SAV by writing the 285-byte character record
as-is.

Items are saved to CHRDAT?#.ITM by writing every 63-byte item record as-is, one
after another.

Effects are saved to CHRDAT?#.SPC by writing every 9-byte effect record as-is,
one after another.

The most prominent data that are not saved are anything related to the state of
barred doors.  The save game file includes the entire current ECL script; I
don't know what SSI's justification for that is.

SECTION 12.6.1 - Executable Overview
------------------------------------

All discussion of the executable assumes you are running PC version v1.3.  It
very rarely matters which version of v1.3 (original CD version vs. any cracked
CD version like the GOG release).

There is no 64KB limit on the amount of executable code anywhere; in Turbo
Pascal CS can and does regularly change depending on code branch.

Turbo Pascal uses as a calling convention:
  * parameters are pushed to the stack left-to-right
  * consequently, parameters appear on the stack upside-down
  * callee is responsible for restoring the stack pointer
All of these are reversed from the typical C/C++ calling convention.  (This
convention makes it impossible for Write/Writeln to work like C's printf at the
machine code level.)  One thing that does work like C/C++: stack variables are
never automatically set to 0.

Turbo Pascal regularly places data in CS, in both library code and compiled
code.  Other compilers are more strict about keeping data out of CS.  (In other
words: the typical DOS compiler keeps code in the code segment, and data in the
data segment, but Turbo Pascal doesn't adhere to that convention.)

The Turbo Pascal v6 compiler seldom generates the following:
* code to push/pop registers to use registers as temporary variables within a
  compiled function.  Its library machine code often does this, but its
  compiled code rarely does; SI and BX are often available but unused.
* machine code jump tables (SSI implements their own jump tables regularly;
  it's just the compiler they used that doesn't have that kind of savoir-faire)

The stack size is the Turbo Pascal default 16384 bytes.  SS should never
change; a stack of >64KB is both awkward and colossal by 1980s standards.  DS
should be mostly constant; it may change during a library call, or when the
programmer explicitly requests it.  ES fluctuates a lot, as is generally the
case.

Machine code is arranged by code segment, both by address and by IDA's decimal
indexing.

Stated segment addresses are what both the code and IDA say they are, but this
will not reflect the actual segments during program execution.

Parameters are passed on the stack unless otherwise specified.

Turbo Pascal is a pass-by-value language, more so than C; an array will not
decay to a pointer unless the programmer specifies it.  (It's still not pure
pass-by-value, as a File may not be passed by value.)  As pass-by-value is the
default, Strings are often passed by value: the compiler reserves stack memory,
copies the parameter to the stack, then passes a far pointer to that copy.
This maintains pass-by-value semantics, but comes at the cost of large amounts
of machine code and execution time spent copying Strings.

Returns on the stack are possible; it is caller's responsibility to handle
the stack being unwound, typically by passing the return as parameters to a
subsequent function call.

Nested function/procedure declarations are allowed, unlike in C; all
unshadowed arguments and variables of the enclosing scope are visible to the
nested function/procedure, via shared stack space.  (If this sounds like a
combination of convenient, error-prone, and hard-to-analyze, I agree.)

Compiler flags known to have been used by SSI:
  * {$E+} (8087 emulation)
    The Gold Box games use some floating-point, and Pool of Radiance was
    written to run on an 8088, so floating-point emulation is required.  There
    is a bit of unreferenced 8087 machine code present, which is an artifact of
    the compiler not being that fine-grained.
  * {$G-} globally (80286 code generation)
    Pool of Radiance was written to run on an 8088.
  * {$I+} while loading the game; often {$I-} thereafter
    If a disk error happens while setting up the game, an {$I+} fatal error
    isn't unexpected.  Once gameplay begins, SSI sometimes switches over to
    {$I-}; the best way for a Turbo Pascal programmer to check if the right
    virtual disk is present is to try to open then close a file on the desired
    disk.  If {$I+} were always active, Pool of Radiance would quit to DOS if
    this check fails.
  * {$N-} (numeric processing)
    Pool of Radiance doesn't use >48-bit floating-point.
  * {$O+} (overlay code generation)
    Pool of Radiance has enough code that it swaps code in and out using
    overlays stored in GAME.OVR.
  * {$R-} globally (range check function is unreferenced)
    Constantly range checking would incur a performance penalty.  This is how
    Constitution outside 3...20 causes strange behavior; if {$R+} were the
    case, Pool of Radiance would quit to DOS.
  * {$S-} globally (stack overflow check function is unreferenced)
    Constantly checking for stack overflow would incur a performance penalty.

Compiler flags unknown:
  * {$A} (align data)
    The Turbo Pascal documentation claims that data is either always aligned or
    never aligned.  It's actually sometimes aligned and sometimes not, so the
    documentation must be wrong.  Most likely, this is {$A-}, which is what I
    would have written; {$A+} would improve performance on 80286+ computers
    while worsening performance on an 8088, and that's the opposite of what SSI
    was clearly aiming for.  I don't know for certain, though.
  * {$B} (force full Boolean evaluation)
    Likely {$B-} (Boolean short-circuiting) globally; having a good reason to
    desire {$B+} is rare, and is outright not allowed in C.  (C++ can require
    {$B+} if you are overloading binary boolean operators, which is a flaw in
    C++ typically fixed by code standards banning that.)

SECTION 12.6.2 - Executable Code
--------------------------------

(Lib) means that the function is part of the Turbo Pascal library, not anything
SSI wrote -- in these cases, the machine code IS the source code, more or less.
Internal parameters often but do not necessarily match what SSI's programmers
would have seen.  This code is optimized for speed, not space or readability.

(Unref) means that IDA Pro believes the function is not referenced.  If a
function is referenced only by unreferenced functions, that is considered
referenced by IDA Pro; if a function is referenced only via pointer, that is
considered unreferenced.

(Unexec) is my own belief of whether a function never actually executes.

(Wrap) means this is a wrapper function (e.g., for trapping division by zero).

Many empty functions below look like initialization functions where no
initialization is necessary; they're always at the tail end of a unit.

Turbo Pascal functions and procedures are documented in TPv6LR.

For graphics, SSI rolled their own code directly interacting with hardware; the
Graph unit is actually completely absent.  The Graph unit of Turbo Pascal had
no Tandy support, which would have been a problem for writing a commercial game
in 1988, but even v4 did have EGA and custom font support.

Segment 0000 (IDA segment 0): (uncompressed EXE - add 200 for offset)
Main.  Not actually called "main", unlike C/C++; also not treated as a normal
function.  Main is treated as a normal function in C but not C++; if this were
a C program, main would be called from here.  (Reminder: this code won't
actually be at 0000:0000 during program execution.)
0000 0005 "STING"
0006 0150 Main
          (* Call initializer for most units.  Most are empty functions; the
             ones that are not:
             * Segment 50, System
             * Segment 48, Crt
             * Segment 40, game initialization 1
             * Overlay 1, out of memory handling
           * Call 26B3:002D game initialization 2.
           * Call 18FE:0627 introduction.
           * Call 197F:00FD copy protection, if STING cheat not used.
           * Call 3171:0161 main menu.
           * Call 19B5:32F8 main game loop.)
0151 015F (segment byte alignment)

Segment 00BA (IDA segment 26): (uncompressed EXE - add 1480 for offset)
Commonly used functions.
Begin End
0000 01FA Creature weapon statistic adjustment
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          (Modifies creature statistics according to its currently equipped
          weapon.  Accounts for weapon statistics, Strength, Dexterity, magical
          pluses on both weapon and relevant ammunition, and the elven +1 bonus
          to-hit with some weapons.  Does nothing if creature has no equipped
          weapon.)
01FB 0281 Creature armor movement adjustment
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Item
          (Accounts for magical plus on armor, but does not adjust for anything
          other than armor.)
0282 039F Creature armor adjustment helper
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Item
          Parameter 3: Pointer to int8[5] armor adjustment
                         0: Dexterity
                         1: shield
                         2: miscellaneous
                         3: Ring of Protection
                         4: body armor or bracers
          Parameter 4: Pointer to Boolean item is magical body armor
          Return at Pointer to int8[5]: armor adjustments for item
          Return at Pointer to Boolean: if body armor with +1 or higher bonus
          (Item may be any equippable item that can affect AC.  Primarily
          mutates the provided armor adjustment array; the only changes
          directly to the creature are for any saving throw bonus adjustment.)
03A0 042C Creature encumbrance movement adjustment
          Parameter: Pointer to creature
          (Modifies creature current movement.)
042D 0433 " Yes  "
0434 043A " No   "
043B 043C "*"
043D 043E " "
043F 0441 "s "
0442 075A Print item String
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature (unused)
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Item
          Parameter 3: uint8 column
          Parameter 4: uint8 row
          Parameter 5: Boolean if item is character inventory item
          Parameter 6: Boolean if String should be printed on screen
          (Constructs item String, writes String to Item, then prints it on
          screen if desired.)
075B 075F "Name"
0760 0766 "AC  HP"
0767 08EC Display party
          Parameter: Pointer to character to highlight
          (Uses the below two procedures.  Clears the rows used, plus the row
          below the last row.  Highlighted character is not necessarily the
          current character.)
08ED 08EE "-"
08EF 0972 Print Armor Class
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 column
          Parameter 3: uint8 row
          (Printed in bright green.  Caller is expected to adjust for string
          length.)
0973 09C8 Print hit points
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 column
          Parameter 3: uint8 row
          Parameter 4: Boolean hot pink flag
          (Printed in hot pink if requested, else yellow if injured or bright
          green if not.  Caller is expected to adjust for string length.)
09C9 09CA " "
09CB 09D4 "Hitpoints"
09D5 09D7 "AC"
09D8 09E2 "(Helpless)"
09E3 0B72 Combat print creature information
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          (Prints creature name, hit points, AC, equipped weapon if any,
          status, and helplessness.)
0B73 0BB7 Determine if creature is helpless
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: Boolean helplessness
          (Creature is helpless if it has any of effects 31, 51, 52, or 53.)
0BB8 1036 Recalculate creature statistics
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          (Resets and recalculates the following:
           * Equipment pointers
           * Encumbrance, corrected for Bag of Holding
           * Strength and Dexterity modifiers for weapon
           * Accuracy and damage from weapon, including any +1 elf bonus
           * Dexterity modifiers for armor
           * Armor bonuses from equipped armor
           * Saving throw bonuses from equipment
           * Movement, corrected for encumbrance and equipped body armor
           * Rear attack armor class.)
1037 1072 Convert uint8 to String
          Parameter 1: Pointer to String
          Parameter 2: uint8
          Return on stack: Pointer to String
1073 10AC Convert uint16 to String
          Parameter 1: Pointer to String
          Parameter 2: uint16
          Return on stack: Pointer to String
10AD 10E5 Convert int32 to String
          Parameter 1: Pointer to String
          Parameter 2: int32
          Return on stack: Pointer to String
10E6 1167 Creature Dexterity armor adjustment
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: int8 adjustment
          (In terms of 60-AC, not AC, i.e. a positive adjustment lowers AC.
          Returns 0 for Dexterity above 25.)
1168 11E9 Creature Dexterity reaction/missile adjustment
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: int8 adjustment
          (Returns 0 for Dexterity above 25.)
11EA 1281 Creature translated Strength
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: Strength mapped to uint8:
            0...18         : as-is
            18(01)...18(50): 19
            18(51)...18(75): 20
            18(76)...18(90): 21
            18(91)...18(99): 22
            18(00)         : 23
            19...25        : add 5 (24...30)
1282 1324 Creature Strength to-hit adjustment
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: int8 to-hit adjustment
          (Always returns 0 if the creature's Strength isn't allowed to affect
          to-hit, or if Strength is above 25.)
1325 13AA Creature Strength to-damage adjustment
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: int8 to-damage adjustment
          (Always returns 0 if the creature's Strength isn't allowed to affect
          to-damage, or if Strength is above 25.)
13AB 148A Character weight allowance
          Parameter: Pointer to character
          Return in AX: int16 weight allowance
          (As defined in the D&D 1E PHB; the result has to be translated for
          actual use.)
148B 14CD Remove spell from current creature
          Parameter: uint8 spell ID
          (Does nothing if spell not currently memorized.)
14CE 14E1 "Nil Item pointer..."
14E2 1508 "Tried to Lose item & couldn't find it!"
1509 15F6 Remove item from creature inventory
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Item
15F7 1692 Add item copy to creature inventory
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Item
          (Does not check if creature inventory is full, responsibility is on
          caller.  As a copy, responsibility for memory management of the
          original is not transferred.)
1693 16EB Print String on bottom line of screen with pause
          Parameter: Pointer to String
16EC 17E2 Print creature name and String in window
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to String
          Parameter 3: uint8 row (only used during combat)
          Parameter 4: Boolean pause after message
          (* If out of combat: a new window is created that is always maximum
             width, with its bottom always the bottom row.  If DS:6DDA is 0, a
             border is included.
           * If in combat: the existing combat message window is used.)
17E3 1812 Clear message from message window
          (Handles both combat and non-combat message window.  Does not erase
          new borders, or restore anything overwritten by the non-combat
          message window.)
1813 1815 "'s"
1816 1891 Display creature name
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 column
          Parameter 3: uint8 row
          Parameter 4: Boolean possessive (if True, appends "'s")
          (Color is bright red for a defeated creature, skyblue for a party
          member or ally, yellow for a hostile creature.)
1A29 1FEA Combat animate moving icon
          Parameter 1: int8 start X-coordinate (0...49)
          Parameter 2: int8 start Y-coordinate (0...24)
          Parameter 3: int8 end X-coordinate (0...49)
          Parameter 4: int8 end Y-coordinate (0...24)
          Parameter 5: unknown uint8
          Parameter 6: unknown uint8
1FEB 2198 Print creature name and String in window with animation and sound
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: Boolean 0 for damage, 1 for effect
          Parameter 3: Pointer to String
          (Not for weapon damage.  Suppresses animation and sound if not in
          combat.)
2199 2207 Check if creature has effect
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 effect ID
          Parameter 3: Pointer to Effect
          Return in AL: Boolean if found
          Return at Pointer to Effect: first found (nil if none found)
2208 2227 Set of status conditions where creature should be in play
2228 2325 Inflict damage
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 damage
          (Handles damage and any status changes; no UI update.)
2326 2335 "is fully healed"
2336 2349 "is partially healed"
234A 23B6 Print hit point restoration message
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
23B7 23DA Reverse hostility flag
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: Boolean reverse hostility flag
23DB 2432 Count teams
          (Goes through creature list, setting DS:6814 to number of friendly
          creatures and DS:6815 to number of hostile creatures.)
2433 255A Count potential targets
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 range
          Return in AL: uint8 count of potential targets
          (Only considers opposing creatures.  Also adjusts DS:671A, and
          DS:6DE5 array.)
255B 2636 Calculate distance to other creature
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to other Creature
          Return in AL: uint8 distance
2637 267C End creature actions this combat round
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: Boolean True
          (Initiative, spell being cast, the guarding flag, and movement are
          all set to 0.)
267D 2685 "Guarding"
2686 26C1 Creature guard
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: Boolean True
          (Ends creature actions this combat round, sets guarding flag, and
          prints "Guarding".)
26C2 2728 Get caster level
          Parameter: uint8 spell ID
          Return in AL: uint8 caster level
          (* If spell is from a scroll, returns 6.
           * If spell is from any other item, returns 12.
           * If spell is being cast by a creature, returns the cleric or
             magic-user level of creature.)
2729 2729 ""
272A 27D3 Draw noncombat windows
          Parameter: Boolean draw 3D/picture inset
          (Clears all of the screen except for the bottom line, then draws the
          three standard noncombat windows: 3D/picture view in top left,
          party view in top right, message window on bottom.  Also draws border
          around 3D/picture view if specified.)
27D4 27D4 ""
27D5 27D8 "PIC"
27D9 28F1 Display noncombat interface
          (Draws noncombat windows; displays graphics in upper-left window if
          there is one; displays party and prints miscellaneous noncombat
          information in upper-right window if there is one.)
28F2 28F3 "0"
28F4 28F5 ","
28F6 28F7 " "
28F8 28F9 ":"
28FA 2902 " camping"
2903 290A " search"
290B 2B5D Print miscellaneous noncombat interface information
          (Prints coordinates, time, facing, and whether the party is camping
          or searching on the bottom of the upper-right party window.)
2B5E 2B86 Display wilderness noncombat interface
2B87 2B87 ""
2B88 2C18 Display combat interface
2C19 2C1E " Exit"
2C1F 2C3E Set of valid selection char codes (Return, Escape, "E", "S")
2C3F 2C40 " "
2C41 2C47 "Select"
2C48 2E02 Select character
          Parameter 1: Pointer to query String
          Parameter 2: Boolean flag to add Exit to horizontal menu
          Parameter 3: Pointer to Pointer to character
          Return at Pointer: Pointer to selected character (nil if none)
          (Only for selecting characters.  Does not set character to current
          character.)
2E03 2E45 Does creature have ranged weapon equipped
          Return in AL: Boolean
          (Thrown weapons count as ranged.)
2E46 2E9A Does creature have throwable weapon equipped
          Return in AL: Boolean
2E8B 2F56 Find damaging ranged weapon
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Pointer to Item
          Return in AL: False if not found, True if found
          Return in Pointer: Pointer to damaging ranged weapon
          (Returns arrows with bow, bolts with crossbow, and primary weapon
          if it is thrown; with True in all those cases.  Return True and nil
          with a Sling, False and nil with a pure melee weapon.)
309E 30A2 Empty function
30A3 30AF (segment byte alignment)

Segment 03DA (IDA segment 32): (uncompressed EXE - add 4680 for offset)
Nothing here; probably something planned but not implemented.
Begin End
0000 0004 Empty function
0005 000F (segment byte alignment)

Segment 03ED (IDA segment 36): (uncompressed EXE - add 47B0 for offset)
Nothing here; probably something planned but not implemented.
Begin End
0000 0004 Empty function
0005 000F (segment byte alignment)

Segment 03F1 (IDA segment 38): (uncompressed EXE - add 4927 for offset)
Begin End
0000 0136 Draw border around window
          Parameter 1: int8 upper left char column of enclosed space
          Parameter 2: int8 upper left char row of enclosed space
          Parameter 3: int8 lower right char column of enclosed space
          Parameter 4: int8 lower right char row of enclosed space
          Parameter 5: uint8 corner
          (Corner is the 8x8 symbol number, minus 276, then divided by 2.
          The vertical symbol follows it; the horizontal symbol follows that.
          The area within the border is not cleared.)
0137 02E7 Clear rectangle on screen
          Parameter 1: int8 upper left char column
          Parameter 2: int8 upper left char row
          Parameter 3: int8 lower right char column
          Parameter 4: int8 lower right char row
          (Almost but not quite identical to 0709:0DD3.)
02E8 0366 Clear window, draw border, and print title
          Parameter 1: int8 upper left char column
          Parameter 2: int8 upper left char row
          Parameter 3: int8 lower right char column
          Parameter 4: int8 lower right char row
          Parameter 5: uint8 corner
          Parameter 6: uint8 color (0...15)
          Parameter 7: Pointer to title String
          (Clears a rectangular area, then draws a border around the
          perimeter, where corner is as in 03F1:0000.  If a title is specified,
          it is printed centered on the top row in the given color.)
0367 036B Empty function
036C 036F (segment byte alignment)

Segment 042B (IDA segment 40): (uncompressed EXE - add 4B90 for offset)
Begin End
0000 0008 "GAME.OVR"
0009 0011 "pool.cfg"
0012 002D "Please insert startup disk."
002E 0036 "POOL.CFG"
0037 004E "Unable to find POOL.CFG"
004F 0078 "Not enough memory to run game.  You need "
0079 0085 " more bytes."
0086 00A3 "Overlay error, program abort!"
00A4 038F Game initialization 1
          (* Initialize GAME.OVR.
           * Disable CheckBreak.
           * Reserve 100,352 bytes for the overlay buffer.
           * Load POOL.CFG.
           * Initialize graphics and sound.)

Segment 0464 (IDA segment 41): (uncompressed EXE - add 4F20 for offset)
Begin End
0000 007A Find transparency color in chunk of raw image data
          Parameter 1: uint8 transparency color in raw image data
          Parameter 2: 4-byte array (8 pixels) of raw image data
          Return in AL: uint8 with bits set if pixel is transparent
007B 00CE Transform EGA color to CGA color
          Parameter 1: uint8 color (0...15)
          Parameter 2: Pointer to color map
          Return in AL: uint8 color (0...3)
          (The color map is of the format used in an image buffer: 8 bytes,
          representing an array of 16 nibbles.)
00CF 00FE Call INT 10 AH 00 (set video mode)
          Parameter: uint8 value to place in AL
00FF 010B Restore original video mode
          (Called before exiting to DOS.)
010C 0110 ".dax"
0111 02A4 Load image buffer from data archive
          Parameter 1: Pointer to file name (no extension, ".dax" added)
          Parameter 2: uint8 ID of file in data archive
          Parameter 3: Boolean transparency flag
          Parameter 4: uint8 transparency color in raw image data
          Parameter 5: Pointer to image buffer
          Return at Pointer: loaded image buffer
          (If the image buffer pointer is not nil, its previous contents are
          freed.)
02A5 08D3 Copy raw image data to image buffer
          Parameter 1: Pointer to image data
          Parameter 2: uint16 position of raw image data
          Parameter 3: Boolean transparency flag
          Parameter 4: uint8 transparency color in raw image data
          Parameter 5: Pointer to image buffer
          (The conversion is performed as described in Image Buffer Format.)
08D4 0D70 Copy image buffer to view image buffer
          Parameter 1: int8 column in char
          Parameter 2: int8 row in char
          Parameter 3: uint8 id
          Parameter 4: Boolean unknown
          Parameter 5: Pointer to source image buffer
          Parameter 6: Pointer to view image buffer
1951 1B51 Display image buffer, simply
          Parameter 1: int16 upper-left column in char (1 char = 8 pixels)
          Parameter 2: int16 upper-left row in char
          Parameter 3: Pointer to image buffer
          (If there are multiple images, only the first is displayed.
          Any transparent color is displayed as color 0, usually black.)
1B52 1E5B Display view image buffer
248E 2594 Allocate image buffer
          Parameter 1: uint16 height of image in pixels
          Parameter 2: uint16 width of image in char (1 char = 8 pixels)
          Parameter 3: uint8 image count
          Parameter 4: Boolean whether to allocate space for transparency
          Parameter 5: Pointer to Pointer
          Return at Pointer: Pointer to image buffer
2595 25F6 Free image buffer
          Parameter: Pointer to image buffer
          Return at Pointer: nil
          (Does nothing if parameter is nil.  Frees both the image buffer and
          any extra transparency space otherwise.)
2A0D 2A49 Set single palette register (by call to INT 10 AX 1000)
          Parameter 1: uint8 value for BL register (palette)
          Parameter 2: uint8 value for BH register (color)
2A4A 2A4E Empty function
2A4F 2A4F (segment byte alignment)

Segment 0709 (IDA segment 42): (uncompressed EXE - add 7970 for offset)
Begin End
0071 009F Setup EGA current page
          Parameter: uint8 page (0...7)
          (Switches the current page and calculates its offset.  Multiple EGA
          pages were apparently planned, then abandoned by SSI; the page is
          always 0.  These functions don't actually calculate the offset of a
          page correctly; an EGA 320x200x16 page isn't 512 bytes, it's 8000.
          That doesn't matter because the page is always 0, but what does
          matter is that many EGA writes are performed twice for no reason.)
00A0 00B6 Setup EGA other page
          Parameter: uint8 page (0...7)
          (As above, but with no call to INT 10 AH 05.)
0171 0176 "8x8d1"
0177 017B ".dax"
017C 01DE Load game font (from 8X8D1.DAX)
01DF 05EA Print char on screen using game font
          Parameter 1: uint8 column (does nothing if >= 40)
          Parameter 2: uint8 row (does nothing if >= 25)
          Parameter 3: uint8 color (0...15)
          Parameter 4: uint8 count (number of times to repeat this char)
          Parameter 5: uint8 char code
          Parameter 6: Boolean isASCII (0 means GB character set)
05EB 0625 Print spaces
          Parameter 1: uint8 column
          Parameter 2: uint8 row
          Parameter 3: uint8 color
          Parameter 4: uint8 count of spaces
0626 06A6 Print String on screen using game font
          Parameter 1: uint8 column (does nothing if >= 40)
          Parameter 2: uint8 row (does nothing if >= 40)
          Parameter 3: uint8 color (0...15)
          Parameter 4: Pointer to String
06A7 0713 Print char in message window (nested procedure of 0768)
0714 074D Find new index on new line in message window (nested procedure of
          0768)
074E 0767 "Press any key to continue"
0768 09E2 Print String in message window with splitting
          Parameter 1: uint8 upper left char column
          Parameter 2: uint8 upper left char row
          Parameter 3: uint8 lower right char column
          Parameter 4: uint8 lower right char row
          Parameter 5: uint8 color (0...15)
          Parameter 6: Boolean clear window first
          Parameter 7: Pointer to String
          (Splits String onto multiple lines if necessary.  If window is not
          large enough, user is asked to press any key to continue, which
          clears the message window and continues the message.  If DS:4A00 is
          set, prints slower than other messages to give time to read.)
09E3 0B65 Input String on bottom line of screen
          Parameter 1: Pointer to input String
          Parameter 2: Pointer to query String
          Parameter 3: uint8 query color (0...15)
          Parameter 4: uint8 maximum length of input String
          Return on stack: Pointer to input String, converted to uppercase
          (The query and input Strings combined must fit on the bottom line of
          the screen.  ASCII codes 64...96 that are not letters will be
          displayed in the GB font but returned as ASCII.  The parser also
          recognizes Backspace, Return, and Escape.)
0B66 0BF4 Input uint16 on bottom line of screen
          Parameter 1: Pointer to query String
          Parameter 2: uint8 query color (0...15)
          Return in AX: uint16
          (Maximum input length is always 6.  Input is retried until it parses
          as a valid uint16.)
0BF5 0C3E Print String on bottom row using game font, then wait for key
          Parameter 1: uint8 color (0...15)
          Parameter 2: Pointer to String
          Return in AL: uint8 char code
0C3F 0CAA Centiseconds elapsed since midnight
          Return in DX:AX: int32 centiseconds
          (Identical to 08AE:0000.)
0CAB 0D11 Clear screen
0D68 0DBD Print String on bottom row with pause
          Parameter 1: Pointer to String
          Parameter 2: uint8 color (0...15)
0DBE 0DD2 Pause, using current Delay
0DD3 0F81 Clear rectangle on screen
          Parameter 1: int8 upper left char column
          Parameter 2: int8 upper left char row
          Parameter 3: int8 lower right char column
          Parameter 4: int8 lower right char row
          (Almost but not quite identical to 03F1:0137.)
0F82 0F86 Empty function
0F87 0F8F (segment byte alignment)

Segment 0802 (IDA segment 43): (uncompressed EXE - add 8900 for offset)
Begin End
0000 001F Free memory for data archive compressed file
          Parameter 1: Pointer to compressed data file
          Parameter 2: uint16 size of compressed data file
0020 003F Allocate memory for data archive compressed file
          Parameter 1: Pointer to compressed data file
          Parameter 2: uint16 size of compressed data file
          Return at Pointer and in DX:AX: pointer to allocated memory
          (Caller is responsible for freeing the allocated memory.)
0040 0104 Print Char on screen using system font
          Parameter 1: uint8 column
          Parameter 2: uint8 row
          Parameter 3: uint8 color (0...15)
          Parameter 4: uint8 count (number of times to repeat this character)
          Parameter 5: uint8 char code
0105 0174 Print String on screen using system font
          Parameter 1: uint8 column
          Parameter 2: uint8 row
          Parameter 3: uint8 color (0...15)
          Parameter 4: Pointer to String
0175 0192 Print solid block characters (system font character 219)
          Parameter 1: uint8 column
          Parameter 2: uint8 row
          Parameter 3: uint8 color (0...15)
          Parameter 4: uint8 count (number of times to repeat solid block)
0193 01EC Print String on bottom row using system font, until key is pressed
          Parameter 1: uint8 color (0...15)
          Parameter 2: far pointer to String
01ED 01F5 "game.ovr"
01F6 0211 "Please insert overlay disk."
0212 025C Ensure GAME.OVR is present
          (Asks user to insert disk if not.)
025D 02EA Open file for reading data
          Parameter 1: Pointer to file name
          Parameter 2: Pointer to appropriate insert disk message
          Parameter 3: Boolean suppress prompt to insert disk
          Parameter 4: Pointer to File
          Return in AL: Boolean file was found
          Return in File: opened untyped File
          (If the file was found, it is opened as untyped data.  If the prompt
          is not suppressed and the file was not found, the player is
          asked to insert a disk until it is found.  There is no IOResult
          checking of the file open operation, only the find file operation.)
02EB 0355 Does file exist
          Parameter: Pointer to filename
          Return in AL: Boolean
          (Returns False if an empty string is passed.  In Turbo Pascal that is
          the console, which always exists, but a special exception is made in
          that case.)
0356 0424 Sanitize String
          Parameter 1: Pointer to destination String
          Parameter 2: Pointer to String to be sanitized
          Parameter 3: Pointer to String to be deleted
          Return on stack: Pointer to destination String
          (Removes occurrences of String to be deleted from String to be
          sanitized.  Has a bug as the index is always advanced even when chars
          are deleted; results in crashes if an improperly sanitized String is
          used as a file name.)
0425 050E Sanitize file name
          Parameter 1: Pointer to destination String
          Parameter 2: Pointer to String with file name to be sanitized
          Return on stack: Pointer to destination String
          (Tries to remove invalid char codes from file name, enforces the 8
          character maximum, and converts all characters to uppercase.)
050F 05CA Decompress compressed data from data archive
          Parameter 1: Pointer to compressed data
          Parameter 2: Pointer to hold decompressed data
          Parameter 3: Pointer to uint16 length of compressed data
          Parameter 4: Pointer to uint16 length of decompressed data
          (All pointers are assumed to be valid, and everything is expected to
          be well-behaved.  Parameter 4 is never used.)
05CB 05CD ":"
05CE 0636 Open data archive
          Parameter 1: Pointer to data archive directory and file name
          Parameter 2: Pointer to data archive file extension
          Parameter 3: Pointer to uint16 size of entire file header
          Parameter 4: Pointer to File 1
          Parameter 5: Pointer to File 2
          Return in AL: Boolean file successfully opened
          Return at both Pointers to File: opened File
          (The compressed file is opened; both File pointers are for the same
          file.  File 1 position is moved to beginning of its data; File 2
          position starts at the third byte.)
0637 070B Close data archive
          Parameter 1: Pointer to data archive File 1
          Parameter 2: Pointer to data archive File 2
070C 0715 "tempsize "
0716 0949 Load data from data archive
          Parameter 1: Pointer to file name
          Parameter 2: Pointer to file extension (always ".DAX" in practice)
          Parameter 3: uint8 ID of file in archive
          Parameter 4: Pointer to uint16 size of data read
          Parameter 5: Pointer to data
          Return at Pointer to uint16: 0 if error, bytes read otherwise
          Return at Pointer to data: nil if error, Pointer to data otherwise
          (Typically asks user to insert disk if the archive cannot be found.
          Finds compressed data, allocates memory for caller, and decompresses
          data there.  Caller is responsible for freeing the decompressed data
          memory.)
094A 095C Set new floppy disk number
          Parameter: uint8 new disk number
095D 0967 Restore old floppy disk number
0968 096C Empty function
096D 096F (segment byte alignment)

Segment 0899 (IDA segment 44): (uncompressed EXE - add 9270 for offset)
Keyboard functions.
0000 0032 Quit to DOS
0033 0052 Set of POOL.CFG sound settings to remember
0053 0058 "STING"
0059 0103 Read keystroke (waits for input if necessary)
          Return in AL: uint8 char code
          (* Traps Ctrl-S, which stops any currently playing sound and changes
             the sound setting.
           * Traps Ctri-D, which with STING toggles hit point debugging.
           * Traps Ctrl-C, which with STING quits to DOS.
           * Returns 0 if any key with an extended scan code is pressed.
           * Empties keyboard buffer and only returns the last key code
             otherwise.)
0104 0121 Empty keyboard buffer
0122 013B (Wrap) Read keystroke, but do not wait for user
          Return in AL: uint8 char code (as above, but return 0 if no stroke)
013C 0140 Empty function
0141 014F (segment byte alignment)

Segment 08AE (IDA segment 45): (uncompressed EXE - add 93C0)
Sound; SSI didn't use the primitive APIs in Crt (even the very first version of
IBM PC BASIC is easily far superior to Crt for sound).  Much of this looks like
code copied from elsewhere.
0000 006B Centiseconds elapsed since midnight
          Return in DX:AX: int32 centiseconds
          (Identical to 0709:0C3F.)
00DC 017A Play sound effect
          Parameter: int16 sound effect number
            -1 silence
             0 unused
             1 unused
             2 spell other than Lightning Bolt or Fireball
             3 magic damage
             4 magic effect
             5 reduced to 0 HP
             6 ranged weapon attack launched
             7 melee attack hit
             8 lightning bolt
             9 melee attack missed
            10 moving, or CALL $BA03 when GBVM $03DE is 8
            11 fireball, or CALL $BA03 when GBVM $03DE is 10
            12 ranged weapon attack arrives at target
            13 unused
            14 unused
            15 unused
017B 01A4 Initialize sound
          (Only runs once.)
01A5 01D1 Setup sound
          Parameter: uint16 unknown
          (Runs once per sound.)
01D2 01D6 Empty function
01DD 01FE Obfuscated error string (neither error nor address make any sense)
1378 137B Previous INT 08 vector
13EA 1475 (Unref) INT 08 handler

Segment 0A31 (IDA segment 46): (uncompressed EXE - add ABF0 for offset)
Nothing here; probably something planned but not implemented.
0000 0004 Empty function
0005 000F (segment byte alignment)

Segment 0A32 (IDA segment 47): (uncompressed EXE - add AC00 for offset)
Dos unit (TPv6PG chapter 11).  Does not have an initializer, unlike all other
units I've seen.
Begin End
000B 0044 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Intr procedure entry)
          Parameter 1: uint8 interrupt to call
          Parameter 2: Pointer to registers
          (Loads registers from pointer and calls the interrupt.)
0045 006B (Lib, Unref) (Turbo Pascal Intr procedure exit)
          Parameter: Pointer to registers
          (Called after the above interrupt call returns.  Stores registers
          from the interrupt call.)
006C 008D (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Get system date (Turbo Pascal GetDate procedure)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to uint16 year
          Parameter 2: Pointer to uint8 month
          Parameter 3: Pointer to uint8 day
          Parameter 4: Pointer to uint8 day of week
          Sets all variables accordingly.
008E 00A1 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Set system date (Turbo Pascal SetDate procedure)
          Parameter 1: uint16 year
          Parameter 2: uint8 month
          Parameter 3: uint8 day
00A2 00C6 (Lib) Get system time (Turbo Pascal GetTime procedure)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to uint8 hours
          Parameter 2: Pointer to uint8 minutes
          Parameter 3: Pointer to uint8 seconds
          Parameter 4: Pointer to uint8 centiseconds
          Sets all variables accordingly.
          (Each DOS clock cycle advances the time by ~6 centiseconds.)
00C7 00DD (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Set system time (Turbo Pascal SetTime procedure)
          Parameter 1: uint8 hours
          Parameter 2: uint8 minutes
          Parameter 3: uint8 seconds
          Parameter 4: uint8 centiseconds
00DE 00DF (segment byte alignment)

Segment 0A40 (IDA segment 48): (uncompressed EXE - add ACE0 for offset)
Crt unit (TPv6PG chapter 15).
Begin End
0000 002D (Lib) CRT initialization 1
002E 0096 (Lib) CRT initialization 2
0097 00E4 (Lib) Setup video
          Parameter in AL: video mode (for INT 10 AH 00)
012D 0142 (Lib, Unref) INT 1B handler
0143 016A (Lib) Ctrl-Break abort check
016B 017F (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal TextMode procedure)
          Parameter: uint16 video mode
0180 01BF (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal Window procedure)
          Parameter 1: uint8 upper left char column
          Parameter 2: uint8 upper left char row
          Parameter 3: uint8 lower right char column
          Parameter 4: uint8 lower right char row
01C0 01D9 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal ClrScr procedure)
01DA 01ED (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal ClrEol procedure)
01EE 01F2 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal Insline procedure; fallthrough
          to ...)
01F3 0212 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal DelLine procedure)
0213 023E (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal GotoXY procedure)
          Parameter 1: uint8 column
          Parameter 2: uint8 row
023F 024A (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal WhereX function)
          Return in AL: uint8 column (relative to WindMin)
024B 0256 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal WhereY function)
          Return in AL: uint8 row (relative to WindMin)
0257 0270 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal TextColor procedure)
          Parameter: uint8 foreground color
0271 0288 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal TextBackground procedure)
          Parameter: uint8 background color
0289 028E (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal LowVideo procedure)
028F 0294 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal HighVideo procedure)
0295 029B (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal NormVideo procedure)
029C 02BC (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Delay procedure)
          Parameter: uint16 duration to delay in milliseconds
02BD 02C8 (Lib) Empty loop
02C9 02F5 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal Sound procedure)
          Parameter: uint16 frequency of tone in hz
          (The PC speaker plays the tone indefinitely.)
02F6 02FC (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal NoSound procedure)
02FD 030E (Lib) (Turbo Pascal KeyPressed function)
          Return in AL: Boolean if a key has been pressed
          (Does not remove any char from the keyboard buffer.  Metakeys like
          Shift by themselves do not count.)
030F 0330 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal ReadKey function)
          Return in AL: uint8 char code (0 means call again for extended code)
          (Function most likely to be currently active, as it's the one that
          awaits keyboard input.)
0331 035B (Lib) (Turbo Pascal AssignCrt procedure)
          Parameter: Pointer to console File
035C 0393 (Lib) Assign console File function pointers
          Parameter: Pointer to console File
          Return in AX: 0
          (OpenFunc for a console File.)
0394 0440 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Input console File read
          Parameter: Pointer to console File
          Return in AX: 0
          (Default way of reading the keyboard, but not used here.)
0441 0471 (Lib, Unref) Output console File write
          Parameter: Pointer to console File
          Return in AX: 0
          (Default way of printing text, but not usually used here.)
0472 0476 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Dummy console File function
          Parameter: Pointer to console File
          Return in AX: 0
0477 047D (Lib) Print CR + LF to screen (fallthrough to ...)
047E 04D6 (Lib) Print char to screen (using BIOS calls)
          Parameter in AL: uint8 char code
04D7 04F7 (Lib) Scroll screen up
04F8 04FE (Lib) Call INT 10 AH 03 (get cursor position and size)
          Return in CH: start scan line
          Return in CL: end scan line
          Return in DH: row
          Return in DL: column
04FF 0505 (Lib) Call INT 10 AH 02 (set cursor position)
          Parameter in BH: page number (usually 0)
          Parameter in DH: row
          Parameter in DL: column
0506 05A2 (Lib) Print char to screen (using direct memory writes)
          Parameter in AL: uint8 char code
060B 0615 (Lib) Call INT 10
          (Preserves BP, ES, DI, and SI.)
0616 061F (segment byte alignment)

Segment 0AA2 (IDA segment 49): (uncompressed EXE - add B300 for offset)
Overlay unit (TPv6PG chapter 13).  OvrInitEMS doesn't seem to be present.
Initialization is special-cased: it is not automatically called by main and
must be explicitly called by the programmer.
0000 000C (Lib) OvrReadBuf error
          (This is what gets called if OvrReadBuf returns anything not 0.)
000D 0011 (unknown)
0012 00E8 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal OvrInit procedure)
          Parameter: String with overlay filename (passed as value)
00E9 00F4 (Lib) Open overlay file with provided filename
          Parameter 1: uint8 OvrFileMode
          Parameter 2: String with overlay filename
00F5 012F (Lib) Open overlay file from executable directory
          Parameter 1: uint8 OvrFileMode
          Parameter 2: String with overlay filename
          (Called if the first open call above fails.)
0130 0187 (Lib) Open overlay file searching PATH
          Parameter 1: uint8 OvrFileMode
          Parameter 2: String with overlay filename
          (Called if the second open call above fails.)
0188 01A2 (Lib) Open overlay file
01A3 01F1 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal OvrSetBuf procedure)
          Parameter: int32 size of overlay buffer
          (Will be rounded down to the nearest 16 bytes.)
01F2 01FC (Lib) (Turbo Pascal OvrGetBuf procedure)
          Return in DX:AX: int32 size of overlay buffer
01FD 020D (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal OvrSetRetry procedure)
          Parameter: int32 size of probation area in bytes
          (Will be rounded down to the nearest 16 bytes.)
020E 0214 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal OvrGetRetry procedure)
          Return in DX:AX: int32 size of probation area in bytes
0215 024D (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal OvrClearBuf procedure)
024E 025A (Lib) 20-bit integer division by 16
          Parameter in DX:AX: int32 20-bit integer
          Return in AX: uint16 quotient
025B 0267 (Lib) uint16 multiplication by 16
          Parameter in AX: uint16
          Return in DX:AX: int32 product
0268 026B OvrReadBuf default offset
02E6 0337 (Lib, Unref) INT 3F handler
          (This may be called upon in normal program operation, unlike the
          default INT 3F handler.)
055F 055F (segment byte alignment)

Segment 0AF8 (IDA segment 50): (uncompressed EXE - add B860 for offset)
Turbo Pascal core library (System unit; TPv6PG chapter 10), which should always
be the highest non-overlay code segment.  The compiler is intelligent enough to
leave out many unused core library functions (e.g., Real square root), but not
intelligent enough to exclude all of them (e.g., RNG 8087 code).  Anything used
and documented but not present below is likely inlined (e.g., SizeOf).
Begin End
0000 00A8 (Lib) System initialization
          (Always the first thing called by every Turbo Pascal program.)
00A9 00AD (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Default HeapError function
          Return in AX: 0 (always)
00AE 00D6 (Lib, Unref) INT 24 handler
00D7 00DE (Lib, Unref) INT 3F handler (fallthrough)
          Runtime error 208
          (Default INT 3F handler; triggers if the overlay manager is not
          installed and any other overlay routine gets called.)
00DF 00E1 (Lib, Unref) INT 0 handler (fallthrough)
          Runtime error 200
          (Any untrapped division by 0 error calls here.)
00E2 00E5 (Lib) Abort program execution with runtime error (fallthrough)
          Parameter in AX: runtime error code
00E6 00E8 (Lib, Unref) INT 23 handler (fallthrough to ...)
          Runtime error 255 (undocumented error code)
00E9 01A4 (Lib) Abort execution (Turbo Pascal Halt procedure)
          Parameter in AX: uint16 exit code
01A5 01B2 (Lib) Output runtime error string to DOS console
          Parameter in BX: near pointer to C string in CS
01B3 01BE (Lib) Output runtime error code in decimal to DOS console
          Parameter in AX: runtime error code
01BF 01CC (Lib) Output digit of of runtime error code to DOS console
          Parameter in AL: runtime error code
          Parameter in CL: divisor
01CD 01D3 (Lib) Output hexadecimal value of AX to DOS console (fallthrough)
01D4 01DE (Lib) Output hexadecimal value of AL to DOS console
01DF 01E6 (Lib) Output hexadecimal digit to DOS console (fallthrough to ...)
          Parameter in AL: hexdecimal digit
01E7 01ED (Lib) Output single char to DOS console
          Parameter in AL: uint8 char code
01EE 0200 Array of interrupts to preserve.
0201 020F "Runtime error " C string
0210 0214 " at " C string
0215 0218 "." + CR + LF C string
0219 023E Borland copyright notice (technically not any kind of string)
023F 0253 (Lib) malloc equivalent (Turbo Pascal GetMem procedure)
          Parameter: uint16 size of dynamic variable to allocate
          Return in DX:AX: far pointer to allocated memory
          Runtime error 203 if memory cannot be allocated
0254 026D (Lib) free equivalent (Turbo Pascal FreeMem procedure)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to dynamic variable
          Parameter 2: uint16 size of dynamic variable
          Runtime error 204 if pointer is not valid
          (Unlike C, a Turbo Pascal programmer must track the size of
          dynamically allocated heap data.  As you might expect, this results
          in extra work and bloated code that on the other hand may better
          tolerate programmer error.)
026E 027F (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal Mark procedure)
          Parameter: Pointer to Mark
          (Not used by SSI; it's generally not a good idea to combine Mark/
          Release with GetMem/FreeMem in the same program.)
0280 029B (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal Release procedure)
          Parameter: Pointer previously assigned by Mark
029C 02B7 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal MemAvail function; fallthrough to ...)
          Return in DX:AX: int32 total free memory
02B8 0307 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal MaxAvail function)
          Return in DX:AX: int32 largest block of free memory
0308 03D2 (Lib) Find allocable block of memory
          Parameter in AX: uint16 count of bytes to allocate
          Return in DX:AX: far pointer to allocated memory
03D3 0431 (Lib) Place freed memory back in pool
04A2 04A8 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal IOResult function, with {$I-} compile flag)
          Return in AX: current value of IOResult, which is then set to 0
04A9 04B6 (Lib) Checks for fatal I/O errors, with {$I+} compile flag
          Runtime error if IOResult is non-zero
04B7 04DE (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Check range
          (With {$R+} compile flag, checks for range out-of-bounds errors.
          Pool of Radiance was globally compiled with {$R-}.)
04DF 04F6 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Check for stack overflow
          (With {$S+} compile flag, checks for stack overflow.  Pool of
          Radiance was globally compiled with {$S-}.)
04F7 053B (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Assign procedure, text)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to File
          Parameter 2: Pointer to String with file name
053C 0566 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal SetTextBuf procedure)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to File
          Parameter 2: Pointer to buffer
          Parameter 3: (optional) uint16 buffer size
0567 056B (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Reset procedure, text; fallthrough to ...)
          Parameter: Pointer to File
          Return in IOResult: int16 error code
056C 0570 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Rewrite procedure, text; fallthrough to ...)
          Parameter: Pointer to File
          Return in IOResult: int16 error code
0571 05BC (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Append procedure)
          Parameter: Pointer to File
          Return in IOResult: int16 error code
05BD 05C0 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal Flush procedure; fallthrough to
          ...)
          Parameter: Pointer to File
          Return in IOResult: int16 error code
05C1 05FC (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Close procedure, text)
          Parameter: Pointer to File
          Return in IOResult: int16 error code
05FD 060D (Lib) Call text file device driver
          Parameter at ES:DI: File
          Parameter in BX: function pointer offset in File (10 = OpenFunc,
            14 = InOutFunc, 18 = FlushFunc, 1C = CloseFunc)
          Return in IOResult: int16 error code
          (As descrived in TPv6PG pp. 251...253.)
060E 068F (Lib, Unref) (Turbo Pascal OpenFunc default)
          Parameter: Pointer to text File
          Return in AX: int16 error code
          (TPv6PG p. 252:
           * Gets file handle from DOS API.
           * Sets InOutFunc to 0AF8:063A if read-only, 0AF8:071A if write-only.
           * Sets FlushFunc to 0AF8:073F if stdout, nil otherwise.
           * Sets CloseFunc to 0AF8:075F always.)
0690 06E9 (Lib, Unexec) Move text file position to end
          Parameter at ES:DI: File
          Return in AX: int16 error code
          (Called for a text file that was opened with Append.)
06EA 0719 (Lib, Unref) (Turbo Pascal InOutFunc default, read-only text)
          Parameter at ES:DI: File
          Return in AX: int16 error code
          (TPv6PG p. 253.)
071A 073E (Lib, Unref) (Turbo Pascal InOutFunc default, write-only disk file)
          Parameter at ES:DI: File
          Return in AX: int16 error code
          (TPv6PG p. 253.)
073F 075E (Lib, Unref) (Turbo Pascal InOutFunc default, stdout)
          Parameter at ES:DI: File
          Return in AX: int16 error code
          (TPv6PG p. 253.)
075F 0777 (Lib, Unref) (Turbo Pascal CloseFunc default)
          (TPv6PG p. 253.)
0778 079B (Lib) Load registers for read from text file
          Parameter at ES:DI: File
          Return in BX: File buffer position
          Return in DX: File buffer size
          Return at ES:DI: File buffer
          Return in IOResult: 104 if File not open for input
079C 07B7 (Lib) Read char from text file
          Parameter in BX: File buffer position
          Parameter in DX: File buffer size
          Parameter at ES:DI: File buffer
          Return in AL: uint8 char code (^Z if end of file)
          Return in IOResult: int16 error code
          (Returns next char from buffer if possible.)
07B8 07DB (Lib) Load registers for write to text file
          Parameter at ES:DI: File
          Return in BX: File buffer position
          Return in DX: File buffer size
          Return at ES:DI: File buffer
          Return in IOResult: 105 if File not open for output
07DC 07EA (Lib) Write Char to text file
          Parameter in AL: uint8 char
          Parameter in BX: File buffer position
          Parameter in DX: File buffer size
          Parameter at ES:DI: File buffer
07EB 081B (Lib) Read text file buffer
          Parameter in BX: File buffer position
          Parameter in DX: File buffer size
          Parameter at ES:DI: File buffer
          Return in IOResult: int16 error code
081C 0849 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Readln procedure)
          Parameter: Pointer to File
          Return in IOResult: int16 error code
          (The compiler put any arguments into a separate function call.)
084A 086D (Lib) Write CRLF to text file
          Parameter: Pointer to File
          Return in IOResult: int16 error code
          (Always calls 087B.  Last call performed by Writeln; there is no
          single function that is Writeln.)
086E 087A (Lib, Wrap) Call FlushFunc for text file
          Parameter: Pointer to File
          Return in IOResult: int16 error code
087B 0897 (Lib) Call FlushFunc for text file
          Parameter at ES:DI: File
          Return in IOResult: int16 error code
0898 08B6 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Read procedure, text, single char)
          Parameter: Pointer to File
          Return in AL: uint8 char (^Z if end of file)
          Return on stack: Pointer to File
          Return in IOResult: int16 error code
08B7 08E0 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal Write procedure, text, single
          char)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to File
          Parameter 2: uint8 char code
          Parameter 3: int16 width
          Return on stack: Pointer to File
          Return in IOResult: int16 error code
08E1 0918 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Read procedure, text, String)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to File
          Parameter 2: Pointer to String
          Parameter 3: uint16 maximum count of char to read
          Return at Pointer: String
          Return on stack: Pointer to File
          Return in IOResult: int16 error code
0919 0956 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Write procedure, text, String)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to File
          Parameter 2: Pointer to String
          Parameter 3: int16 width
          Return on stack: Pointer to File
          Return in IOResult: int16 error code
0957 09AE (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal Read procedure, text, int32)
          Parameter: Pointer to File
          Return in DX:AX: int32
          Return on stack: Pointer to File
          Return in IOResult: int16 error code
09AF 09F5 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Write procedure, text, int32)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to File
          Parameter 2: int32
          Parameter 3: int16 width
          Return on stack: Pointer to File
          Return in IOResult: int16 error code
0A04 0A3E (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Eof function, text)
          Parameter: Pointer to File
          Return in AL: Boolean
          Return in IOResult: int16 error code
0A3F 0A56 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Move procedure, but with no overlap check)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to source
          Parameter 2: Pointer to destination
          Parameter 3: uint16 number of bytes to copy
          (Like Move, and unlike C memcpy, the source is the first parameter,
          and there is no return of the pointer to the destination.)
0A57 0A5A (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal Sqr function, Integer) Square
          int32 (fallthrough to ...)
          Parameter in DX:AX: int32
          Return in DX:AX: int32 square
0A5B 0A75 (Lib) int32 multiplication
          Parameter 1 in DX:AX: int32 multiplicand
          Parameter 2 in BX:CX: int32 multiplier
          Return in DX:AX: int32 product
0A76 0AE3 (Lib) int32 division
          Parameter 1 in DX:AX: int32 dividend
          Parameter 2 in BX:CX: int32 divisor
          Return in DX:AX: int32 quotient
          Return in BX:CX: int32 remainder
          Runtime error 200 if divisor is 0
0AE4 0AEF (Lib, Unref, Unexec) int32 right shift
          Parameter in DX:AX: int32
          Parameter in CL: shift (only lower 5 bits used)
          Return in DX:AX: shifted int32
          (The sign of DX:AX is not checked.)
0AF0 0AFB (Lib, Unref, Unexec) int32 left shift
          Parameter in DX:AX: int32
          Parameter in CL: shift (only lower 5 bits used)
          Return in DX:AX: shifted int32
          (May change the sign of a positive int32.)
0AFC 0B0A (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Abs function, int32)
          Parameter: int32 in DX:AX
          Return in DX:AX: absolute value
0B0B 0B24 (Lib) strcpy equivalent (no length)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to destination String
          Parameter 2: Pointer to source String
          Return on stack: Pointer to destination String
0B25 0B48 (Lib) strncpy equivalent (with length)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to source String
          Parameter 2: Pointer to destination String
          Parameter 3: uint8 maximum count of characters to copy
          (Unlike both C strncpy and the strcpy equivalent, the source is the
          first parameter, and the destination String is not returned.)
0B49 0B56 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) strlen equivalent (Turbo Pascal Length
          function).
          Parameter: Pointer to String
          Return in AL: uint8 length of String
          (I don't know why this exists at all.  This should be, and is,
          inlined; it's very simple in Pascal so long as String length is
          not allowed to exceed 255.)
0B57 0B97 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Copy function)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to destination String
          Parameter 2: Pointer to source String
          Parameter 3: int16 index of source String to begin with
          Parameter 4: int16 count of characters to copy
          Return on stack: Pointer to destination String
0B98 0BC3 (Lib) strcat equivalent (Turbo Pascal Concat function)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to destination String
          Parameter 2: Pointer to source String
          Return on stack: Pointer to destination String
0BC4 0C0F (Lib, Unref, Unexec) strstr equivalent (Turbo Pascal Pos function)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to substring to search for
          Parameter 2: Pointer to String to be searched
          Return in AL: uint8 index of substring location (0 if none)
0C10 0C3A (Lib) Compare two Strings
          Parameter 1: Pointer to first String
          Parameter 2: Pointer to second String
          Return in FLAGS: comparison result
0C3B 0C4C (Lib) Create String of length 1
          Parameter 1: Pointer to String
          Parameter 2: uint8 char code
          Return on stack: Pointer to String
0C4D 0C67 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Copy substring of given length
          Parameter 1: Pointer to destination String
          Parameter 2: Pointer to source String
          Parameter 3: uint16 count of characters to copy
          Return on stack: Pointer to destination String
0C68 0CBB (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Insert procedure)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to source String
          Parameter 2: Pointer to destination String
          Parameter 3: uint8 maximum count of characters to copy
          Parameter 4: int16 index of destination String to insert source
0CBC 0D11 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Delete procedure)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to String
          Parameter 2: int16 index of character to start deleting characters
          Parameter 3: int16 count of characters to delete
0D12 0D3B (Lib) Copy a Set to another Set, padding with 0.
          Parameter 1: Pointer to destination Set
          Parameter 2: Pointer to source Set
          Parameter 3: uint16 with lower 8 bits number of bytes to copy,
                                   upper 8 bits starting index
          Return on stack: Pointer to destination Set
          (Any destination elements that weren't copied will be removed.)
0D3C 0D4A (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Convert existing Set to empty Set
          Parameter: Pointer to Set
          (Set must be full size.)
0D4B 0D6B (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Add element to Set
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Set
          Parameter 2: uint8 element
          Return on stack: Pointer to Set
0D6C 0D9F (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Add range of elements to Set
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Set
          Parameter 2: uint8 start element
          Parameter 3: uint8 end element
          Return on stack: Pointer to Set
          (Does nothing if begin element comes after end element.)
0DA0 0DBF (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Copy specified number of bytes from a Set to
          another Set
          Parameter 1: Pointer to source Set
          Parameter 2: Pointer to destination Set
          Parameter 3: uint16 with lower 8 bits number of bytes to copy,
                                   upper 8 bits starting index
0DC0 0DE0 (Lib) Test if Set contains requested element
          Parameter 1: uint8 element
          Parameter 2: far pointer to Set
          Return in FLAGS: test result
0DE1 0DFC (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Union of two Sets (logical OR)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to destination/augend Set
          Parameter 2: Pointer to addend Set
          Return on stack: Pointer to destination Set
          (Sets must be full size.)
0DFD 0E1A (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Subtract elements in one Set from another Set
          Parameter 1: Pointer to destination/minuend Set
          Parameter 2: Pointer to subtrahend Set
          Return on stack: Pointer to destination Set
          (Sets must be full size.)
0E1B 0E36 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Intersection of two Sets (logical AND)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to destination Set
          Parameter 2: Pointer to multiplicand Set
          Return on stack: Pointer to destination Set
          (Sets must be full size.)
0E37 0E4D (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Test if two Sets are equal
          Parameter 1: far pointer to Set
          Parameter 2: far pointer to Set
          Return in FLAGS: test result
          (Sets must be full size.)
0E4E 0E6B (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Test if one Set is a subset of another Set
          Parameter 1: far pointer to putative superset Set
          Parameter 2: far pointer to putative subset Set
          Return in FLAGS: test result
          (Sets must be full size.)
0E6C 0E6F (Lib, Unexec) Subtract two Reals (fallthrough to ...)
          Parameter 1 in DX:BX:AX: Real minuend
          Parameter 2 in DI:SI:CX: Real subtrahend
          Return in DX:BX:AX: Real difference
0E70 0F2F (Lib, Unexec) Add two Reals
          Parameter 1 in DX:BX:AX: Real augend
          Parameter 2 in DI:SI:CX: Real addend
          Return in DX:BX:AX: Real sum
0F33 1037 (Lib) Multiply two Reals
          Parameter 1 in DX:BX:AX: Real multiplicand
          Parameter 2 in DI:SI:CX: Real divisor
          Return in DX:BX:AX: Real product
1038 10AE (Lib) Divide two Reals
          Parameter 1 in DX:BX:AX: Real dividend
          Parameter 2 in DI:SI:CX: Real divisor
          Return in DX:BX:AX: Real quotient
10AF 10C5 (Lib, Unexec) Compare two Reals
          Parameter 1 in DX:BX:AX: first Real
          Parameter 2 in DI:SI:CX: second Real
          Return in FLAGS: comparison result
10D9 1117 (Lib) Cast int32 to Real
          Parameter in DX:AX: int32
          Return in DX:BX:AX: Real
1118 1173 (Lib) Cast Real to int32
          Parameter in DX:BX:AX: Real
          Return in DX:AX: int32
1174 1179 (Lib, Unref, Unexec, Wrap) Add two Reals
          Parameter 1 in DX:BX:AX: Real augend
          Parameter 2 in DI:SI:CX: Real addend
          Return in DX:BX:AX: Real sum
          Runtime error 205 if floating-point overflow occurred
117A 117F (Lib, Unref, Unexec, Wrap) Subtract two Reals
          Parameter 1 in DX:BX:AX: Real minuend
          Parameter 2 in DI:SI:CX: Real subtrahend
          Return in DX:BX:AX: Real difference
          Runtime error 205 if floating-point overflow occurred
1180 1185 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Square Real (fallthrough to ...)
          Parameter in DX:BX:AX: Real
          Return in DX:BX:AX: Real square
1186 118B (Lib, Wrap) Multiply two Reals
          Parameter 1 in DX:BX:AX: Real multiplicand
          Parameter 2 in DI:SI:CX: Real divisor
          Return in DX:BX:AX: Real product
          Runtime error 205 if floating-point overflow occurred
118C 1195 (Lib, Wrap) Divide two Reals
          Parameter 1 in DX:BX:AX: Real dividend
          Parameter 2 in DI:SI:CX: Real divisor
          Return in DX:BX:AX: Real quotient
          Runtime error 200 if divisor is 0
          Runtime error 205 if floating-point overflow occurred
1196 1199 (Lib, Unref, Unexec, Wrap) Compare two Reals
          Parameter 1 in DX:BX:AX: first Real
          Parameter 2 in DI:SI:CX: second Real
          Return in FLAGS: comparison result
119A 119D (Lib, Wrap) Cast int32 to Real
          Parameter in DX:AX: int32
          Return in DX:BX:AX: Real
119E 11A5 (Lib, Wrap) Cast Real to int32 (Turbo Pascal Trunc function)
          Parameter in DX:BX:AX: Real
          Return in DX:AX: int32
          Runtime error 207 if Real is not within int32 range
          (The return is always rounded down.)
11A6 11AD (Lib, Unref, Unexec, Wrap) Cast Real to int32 (Turbo Pascal Round
          function)
          Parameter in DX:BX:AX: Real
          Return in DX:AX: int32
          Runtime error 207 if Real is not within int32 range
          (The return is rounded up if appropriate.)
11AE 11B0 Runtime error 207 (Invalid floating point operation) handler
11B1 11B9 Runtime error 205 (Floating point overflow) handler
11BA 11BF Runtime error 200 (Division by zero) handler
11C0 11D5 (Lib) Generate random integer (Turbo Pascal Random function, Word)
          Parameter: uint16 Range
          Return in AX: uint16 0 <= AX < Range (0 if Range is 0)
          (This is one of the most important functions that determines game
          behavior, so it's worth making clear that this advances the seed
          before, not after, calculating the uint16 to return.  If Range > 0,
          the top 16 bits of the seed are divided by the Range of 1...65535,
          and the remainder is returned, which is 0...65534 at the widest.  Any
          source claiming otherwise is wrong.)
11D6 11F2 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Generate random Real 0 <= x < 1, without 80387
          coprocessor (Turbo Pascal Random function, no argument)
          Return in DX:BX:AX: pseudorandom Real
          (No digits get discarded here; the less-random lower-order seed bits
          are just less significant in the floating-point representation.
          There seems to be a slight bug in the floating-point normalization,
          but as this never is called, I can't be bothered to investigate
          further.)
11F3 120E (Lib, Unref, Unexec) Generate random Real 0 <= x < 1, with 80387
          coprocessor (Turbo Pascal Random function, no argument)
          Return in DX:BX:AX: pseudorandom Real
120F 1246 (Lib) Advance random seed
          (Turbo Pascal v4 to v7 use a linear congruential generator, with
          m=4294967296, a=134775813, c=1.  This is particularly important to
          optimize, as RNG is a fairly common performance bottleneck on older
          computers.  If you are new to reading machine code, it might be worth
          your time to figure how the code actually is multiplying by 134775813
          -- this isn't how a compiler would normally encode 32-bit integer
          multiplication.)
1247 1253 (Lib) Initialize random seed (Turbo Pascal Randomize procedure)
          (Uses the DOS system clock; there are slightly more than 65536
          possible starting values.  There is no source I know of that
          describes how this happens correctly, even though it's very simple at
          the machine code level.  This is probably because it is difficult to
          precisely express in any language higher-level than assembly.)
1254 12CD (Lib) Convert int32 to string
          Parameter in DX:AX: int32
          Return in ES:DI: string
          Return in CX: string length
12CE 1365 (Lib) Convert string to int32
          Parameter at ES:DI: string
          Return in DX:AX: int32
          Return in DI: index of problem if there is an error
1366 13B0 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Str procedure, int32)
          Parameter 1: int32 X
          Parameter 2: int16 Width
          Parameter 3: Pointer to destination String S
          Parameter 4: uint8 maximum length of destination String
13B1 13E1 (Lib) Convert String to int32 (Turbo Pascal Val procedure, Integer)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to input String S
          Parameter 2: Pointer to int16
          Return in DX:AX: int32
          Return in int16: Code
13E2 140F (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Assign procedure, not text)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to File
          Parameter 2: Pointer to String with file name
1410 1418 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Reset procedure, not text; fallthrough to ...)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to File
          Parameter 2: uint16 record size
          Return in IOResult: error code
1419 1474 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Rewrite procedure, not text)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to File
          Parameter 2: uint16 record size
          Return in IOResult: error code
1475 1490 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal Truncate procedure)
          Parameter: Pointer to File
          Return in IOResult: error code
1491 14B5 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Close procedure, not text)
          Parameter: Pointer to File
          Return in IOResult: error code
14B6 14C4 (Lib) Check if file is open
          Parameter at ES:DI: File
          Return in IOResult: 103 if File is not open
14C5 14CB (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal Read procedure, not text;
          fallthrough to ...)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to File
          Parameter 2: Pointer to record
          Return on stack: Pointer to File
          Return in IOResult: error code
          (Only one record at a time; the compiler separates any varargs.)
14CC 14FA (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal Write procedure, not text)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to File
          Parameter 2: Pointer to record
          Return on stack: Pointer to File
          Return in IOResult: error code
          (Only one record at a time; the compiler separates any varargs.)
14FB 1501 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal BlockRead procedure; fallthrough to ...)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to File
          Parameter 2: Pointer to destination
          Parameter 3: uint16 count
          Parameter 4: Pointer to uint16 Result
          Return in IOResult: error code
1502 1562 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal BlockWrite procedure)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to File
          Parameter 2: Pointer to source
          Parameter 3: uint16 count
          Parameter 4: Pointer to uint16 Result
          Return in IOResult: error code
1563 1592 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Seek procedure)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to File
          Parameter 2: int32 record number
1593 15A9 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal FilePos function)
          Parameter: Pointer to File
          Return in DX:AX: int32 record position
          Return in IOResult: error code
15AA 15C4 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal FileSize function)
          Parameter: Pointer to File
          Return in DX:AX: int32 number of records
          Return in IOResult: error code
15C5 15D9 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Eof function, not text)
          Parameter: Pointer to File
          Return in AL: Boolean
          Return in IOResult: error code
15DA 161E (Lib) seek file position information
          Parameter at ES:DI: File
          Return in DX:AX: current File position in bytes
          Return in BX:CX: size of File in bytes
          Return in IOResult: 103 if File is not open
          (Current position in file is preserved.)
161F 1635 (Lib) (Turbo Pascal Erase procedure)
          Parameter: Pointer to File
          Return in IOResult: error code
          (May not be used on an open file.)
1636 1684 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal Rename procedure)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to File
          Parameter 2: Pointer to String with new filename
          Return in IOResult: error code
          (May not be used on an open file.)
1685 16A7 (Lib) memcpy equivalent (Turbo Pascal Move procedure)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to source
          Parameter 2: Pointer to destination
          Parameter 3: uint16 count of bytes to copy
          (Unlike C memcpy, the source is the first parameter, and there is no
          return of any pointer to the destination.)
16A8 16BB (Lib) memset equivalent (Turbo Pascal FillChar procedure)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to destination
          Parameter 2: uint16 count of bytes to fill
          Parameter 3: uint8 character to write
16BC 170A (Lib) argv equivalent (Turbo Pascal ParamStr function)
          Parameter 1: Pointer to String
          Parameter 2: uint16 index
          Return on stack: Pointer to (index)th command line parameter
170B 1711 (Lib, Unref, Unexec, Wrap) argc equivalent (Turbo Pascal ParamCount
          function)
1712 1743 (Lib) Count parameters
          Return in BX: count
1744 1794 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal GetDir procedure)
          Parameter 1: uint8 drive (0 = current, 1 = A, 2 = B, etc.)
          Parameter 2: Pointer to String
          Parameter 3: uint16 maximum length (ignored if >79)
          Return in String: current directory on specified drive
          Return in IOResult: error code
1795 17D5 (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal ChDir procedure)
          Parameter: Pointer to String with directory name
          Return in IOResult: error code
17D6 17EA (Lib) (Turbo Pascal MkDir procedure)
          Parameter: Pointer to String with directory name
          Return in IOResult: error code
17EB 17FF (Lib, Unref, Unexec) (Turbo Pascal RmDir procedure)
          Parameter: Pointer to String with directory name
          Return in IOResult: error code
1800 181A (Lib) Convert String to C string
          (Required by some DOS interrupts.)
181B 1829 (Lib) Call INT 21
          Parameter in AH: required for all INT 21 calls
          Parameter on stack at BP-0x80: C string if call requires one
          Other possible parameters: BX, CX, DI, SI (but not DX)
          Return in IOResult: error code
182A 183C (Lib) (Turbo Pascal UpCase function)
          Parameter: uint8 Char
          Return in AL: converted Char
183D 183F (segment byte alignment; end of non-overlay machine code, DS:0000
          follows)

SECTION 12.6.3 - Overlay Code
-----------------------------

Overlay functions that are ever far called have a stub that jumps to it.
Overlay segmentation and numbering is that in the executable and assigned by
IDA; the actual code segments during play will vary.

Segment 18F2 (IDA overlay 1): (GAME.OVR - add 8 for offset)
Out-of-memory error handling.
Begin End
0000 001C "WARNING: Insufficient Memory"
001D 0041 "Insufficient Memory. Exiting Program"
0042 00AB HeapError handler
          Stub: 0016:0025
          Parameter: uint16 count of bytes that could not be allocated
          (Prints error, then allows one last chance to save the game before
          exiting to DOS.  The documentation says "TIME TO SAVE YOUR GAME"
          should appear, which only happens in v1.2 or earlier; this is instead
          what happens in v1.3.  There aren't many memory leaks in Pool of
          Radiance, but there is no protection against memory fragmentation,
          which SSI's programmers appear to have been well aware of.  Not
          spending code space, disk space, memory, or programmer time on
          fragmentation protection is probably the right move circa 1990.)
00AC 00BD Assign HeapError to the stub at 0016:0025
          Stub: 0016:0020

Segment 18FE (IDA overlay 2): (GAME.OVR - add D4 for offset)
Introduction.
Begin End
0000 0049 Delay or until key pressed, whichever comes first
          Parameter: uint16 delay in seconds
          (The delay will not work if midnight arrives before the delay should
          end, but a key press should still work.)
004B 005F "scenario created by:"
0060 0069 "tsr inc."
006A 0072 "jim ward"
0073 0097 "david cook,steve winter,mike breault"
0098 00A8 "game created by:"
00A9 00BD "ssi special projects"
00BE 00C9 "version 1.3"
00CA 00D6 "programming:"
00D7 00DF "original"
00E0 00EC "scot bayless"
00EF 00F7 "brad myers"
00F8 0103 "keith brors"
0104 010E "russ brown"
010F 0118 "ted greer"
0119 0126 "graphic arts:"
0127 0138 "encounter coding:"
0139 0141 "tom wahl"
0142 014D "paul murray"
014E 0158 "fred butts"
0159 0166 "darla marasco"
0167 0174 "victor penman"
0175 0183 "susan hableib"
0184 0190 "dave shelley"
0191 01A0 "project manager"
01A1 01AB "developer:"
01AC 01BD "george mac donald"
01BE 01C6 "testing:"
01C7 01E1 "joel billings,steve salyer"
01E2 0205 "james kucera,robert daly,rick white"
0206 0620 Credits
          (Prints the above Strings.)
0621 0626 "title"
0627 0808 Introduction
          Stub: 0019:0025
          (There are three screens: SSI Presents, etc.; Pool of Radiance, etc.;
          credits.  Only the first is displayed if you have full intro off.
          The second screen flashes the pool, but only if you are using EGA
          graphics; that will also burn RNG seeds the other two graphics modes
          don't.)
0809 080D Empty function
          Stub: 0019:0020

Segment 197F (IDA overlay 3): (GAME.OVR - add 9AC for offset)
Copy protection.
Begin End
0000 0000 ""
0001 0026 "USE THE TRANSLATION WHEEL TO DECIPHER"
0027 0035 "THE CODE WORD."
0036 0059 "MATCH THE ESPRUAR RUNE (OUTER RING)"
005A 007B "WITH THE DETHEK RUNE (INNER RING)"
007C 00A2 "AND READ THE CODE WORD UNDER THE PATH:"
00A3 00A8 "     "
00A9 00CD "READ FROM THE INSIDE TO THE OUTSIDE."
00CE 00E3 "INPUT THE CODE WORD: "
00E4 00FC "Sorry, that's incorrect."
00FD 0358 Copy protection
          Stub: 001C:0025
          (This is about as simple as copy protection code gets; the only
          tricky part about cracking the protection is to do it in a way that
          precisely preserves game behavior.  That typically only matters for
          very deep analysis, including both speedrunning and what you're
          currently reading.  The typical pirate crack often doesn't have that
          kind of precision; the GOG versions I've seen are applied properly.)
0359 035D Empty function
          Stub: 001C:0020

Segment 19B5 (IDA overlay 4): (GAME.OVR - add D46 for offset)
ECL opcode handling.  ECL operands are not normal function parameters.
Begin End
0000 00F3 ECL opcode 00 EXIT
00F4 0110 ECL opcode 01 GOTO
          Operand: GBVM address
          (ECL IP is moved to operand address.)
0111 0125 ECL opcode 02 GOSUB
          Operand: GBVM address
          (Pushes current GBVM address to ECL stack, then moves ECL IP to
          operand address.)
0126 01A2 ECL opcode 03 COMPARE
          Operand 1: variable 1
          Operand 2: variable 2
          (Performs String comparison if operands are both type 128 or 129,
          else performs integer comparison after casting to uint16.  The
          results are stored in DS:6F78...6F7D.)
01A3 0233 ECL opcode arithmetic (04 ADD, 05 SUBTRACT, 06 DIVIDE, 07 MULTIPLY)
          Operand 1: integer
          Operand 2: integer
          Operand 3: GBVM address
          (Operands 1 and 2 are cast to uint16.  Subtrahend comes first for
          SUBTRACT; DIVIDE does not store the remainder as all later Gold Box
          games do, nor does it check for division by zero which should cause
          INT 00 to trip.  Result is stored at operand 3 GBVM address as
          uint16.)
0234 0291 ECL opcode 08 RANDOM
          Operand 1: uint8
          Operand 2: GBVM address
          (Operand 1 is incremented with a maximum of 255, then 0AF8:11C0 is
          called with that value; the return value is written to the GBVM
          address.  For some reason this integer is cast to Real and then
          immediately back to integer.)
0292 02DF ECL opcode 09 SAVE
          Operand 1: variable to save
          Operand 2: GBVM address
          (If operand 1 is type 128, written to GBVM as string; else, written
          to GBVM as its value.)
02E0 03B3 ECL opcode 0A LOAD CHARACTER
          Operand: uint index
03B4 044A ECL opcode 0C SETUP MONSTER
          Operand 1: uint8 monster ID
          Operand 2: uint8 distance (0...2)
          Operand 3: uint8 graphic ID
          (As opcode description.)
044B 044F "CPIC"
0450 0816 ECL opcode 0B LOAD MONSTER
          Operand 1: uint8 monster ID
          Operand 2: uint8 monster count
          Operand 3: uint8 graphic ID
          (Loads the requested combat graphic ID into the next available
          icon animation.  Loads <count> copies of the monster into the
          creature list, with inventory and effect list for each, and with the
          correct icon animation index.)
0817 0850 ECL opcode 0D APPROACH
0851 0851 ""
0852 0855 "PIC"
0856 0950 ECL opcode 0E PICTURE
          Operand: uint8 picture ID
          (* If picture ID is 255:
             End the graphical display and resumes the normal first-person
             view.
           * If GBVM $6DE1 is not 255:
             Display a composite head and body graphic, using $6DE1 as the
             head in HEAD?.DAX and <pictureID> as the body in BODY?.DAX.
           * If GBVM $6DE1 is 255:
             Load the specified picture from PIC?.DAX in the first-person view
             as animation data, then display and animate it.)
0951 0991 ECL opcode 0F INPUT NUMBER
          Operand 1: uint8 digit maximum
          Operand 2: GBVM address
          (Input that cannot be parsed as a uint16 is retried.  Valid input is
          then written to the Operand 2 address.  Operand 1 is ignored; the
          input maximum is always 6.)
0992 0993 " "
0994 0A08 ECL opcode 10 INPUT STRING
          Operand 1: uint8 maximum length
          Operand 2: GBVM address
          (No entry is converted to " ", then the String is written to the
          Operand 2 address.  Operand 1 is ignored; the input maximum length
          is always 40.)
0A09 0A9E ECL opcode print (11 PRINT, 12 PRINTCLEAR)
          Operand: string
          Clears message box if PRINTCLEAR, then prints string in message box,
          witn line break handling.
0A9F 0AEC ECL opcode 13 RETURN
          (Pops the top GBVM return address from the top of the GBVM call stack
          and sets the ECL IP there; acts as no-op if the top of the call stack
          is nil.)
0AED 0B51 ECL opcode 14 COMPARE AND
          Operands 1, 2, 3, 4: values
          (Always sets IF <, IF >, IF <=. and IF >= all to False.  Sets IF = to
          True and IF <> to False if operand 1 equals operand 2 and operand 3
          equals operand 4; otherwise sets IF = to False and IF <> to True.)
0B52 0BC7 ECL opcode comparison (16 IF =, 17 IF <>,
                                 18 IF <, 19 IF >, 1A IF <=, 1B IF >=)
          (Calls 1FDC:1EA6 to advance ECL IP past the next command, unless the
          most recent COMPARE, COMPARE AND, GETTABLE, AND, OR, or FIND ITEM had
          a true comparison.)
0BC8 0BCB "ECL"
0BCD 0BD0 ".dax"
0BD1 0C6C ECL opcode 20 NEWECL
          Operand: uint8 ECL script ID to load
          (Writes previous ECL script ID to $49F2, performs ECL initialization,
          then returns control to the player.  Some time later results in a
          call to 31B4 to complete the process.)
0C6D 0C73 "BACPAC"
0C74 0DEE ECL opcode load files (21 LOAD FILES, 37 LOAD PIECES)
          Operand 1: uint8 file ID
          Operand 2: variable 1
          Operand 3: variable 2
          (As opcode description.)
0DEF 0E5D ECL opcode bitwise (2F AND, 30 OR)
          Operand 1: variable 1
          Operand 2: variable 2
          Operand 3: GBVM address
0E5E 0EBB ECL opcode 2A GETTABLE
          Operand 1: GBVM address 1
          Operand 2: uint index
          Operand 3: GBVM address 2
          (Writes the value of GBVM $(address 1 + index) to address 2.)
0EBC 0F07 ECL opcode 35 SAVE TABLE
          Operand 1: int value
          Operand 2: GBVM address
          Operand 3: uint index
          (Writes value to GBVM $(address + index).)
0F08 1084 ECL opcode 15 VERTICAL MENU
          Operand 1: GBVM address
          Operand 2: message
          Operand 3: uint count of menu choice strings
          Operand 4+: strings
          (Player selects from displayed menu choices in message window; index
          of selection placed at GBVM address.)
1085 10A9 "PRESS <RETURN> OR BUTTON TO CONTINUE"
10AA 10CC "PRESS <ENTER>/<RETURN> TO CONTINUE"
10CD 10CE "~"
10CF 10D0 " "
10D1 125C ECL opcode 2B HORIZONTAL MENU
          Operand 1: GBVM address
          Operand 2: uint count of menu choice strings
          Operand 3+: strings
          (Player selects from displayed menu choices at bottom; index of
          selection placed at GBVM address.)
125D 12C5 ECL opcode 1C CLEARMONSTERS
          (Resets some creature flags and clears treasure, freeing dynamically
          allocated heap memory used by all items in the treasure item list.
          Does not delete creatures from the creature list.)
12C6 13D6 ECL opcode 1D PARTYSTRENGTH
          Operand: GBVM address
          (Writes Party Strength by the calculation in that section to operand
          address.  Party Strength is a uint8 and may overflow.)
13D7 1434 Write values to 4 GBVM addresses (nested procedure of 1435)
          Writes the 4 values to the 4 GBVM addresses.
1435 1628 ECL opcode 1E CHECKPARTY
          Operand 1: attribute GBVM address (0 if searching for effect)
          Operand 2: uint8 effect ID
          Operand 3: destination GBVM address 1
          Operand 4: destination GBVM address 2
          Operand 5: destination GBVM address 3
          Operand 6: destination GBVM address 4
          (As opcode description.)
1629 16C8 ECL opcode 22 PARTY SURPRISE
          Operand 1: GBVM address 1 (party modifier to be surprised)
          Operand 2: GBVM address 2 (party modifier to surprise)
          (Writes 0 to both operand addresses.  With a ranger in the party,
          increases the first operand address by 1.  This should also happen
          for the second address, but doesn't.)
16C9 178E ECL opcode 23 SURPRISE
          Operand 1: GBVM address 1 (party modifier to be surprised)
          Operand 2: GBVM address 2 (party modifier to surprise)
          Operand 3: uint8 monster modifier to surprise party
          Operand 4: uint8 monster modifier to be surprised by party
          (Works, or more properly doesn't, as opcode description.)
178F 1795 "BACPAC"
1796 179A "ICON"
179B 18F7 ECL opcode 24 COMBAT
          (* If GBVM $6E6C is 1, call 1F62:053E shop main menu.
           * If GBVM $6DE2 is 1, call 1D06:0D09 temple main menu.
           * Otherwise starts combat:
             * Calculate maximum monster distance; adjusts GBVM $6DC1 if the
               monsters have to be closer.
             * Call 21FE:007A combat main.
             * Restore 2D map tile set and icons as needed.
             * Reset DS:84D4 duel flag to 0.
           * Call 1DFA:1527 post combat procedure.
           * Restore DS:49F3 interface state.)
18F8 198C ECL opcode case (25 ON GOTO, 26 ON GOSUB)
          Operand 1: uint8 case to use
          Operand 2: uint8 count of GBVM addresses
          Operand 3+: GBVM addresses
          (Executes GOTO or GOSUB to specified address; no-op if case is at
          least equal to count.)
198D 1991 "ITEM"
1992 1996 ".dax"
1997 19AF "Unable to find item file"
19B0 1DB0 ECL opcode 27 TREASURE
          Operands 1...7: int treasure (as copper...jewelry)
          Operand 8: uint8 treasureID
          (As opcode description; this includes some of the basic logic for
          random item generation described in Random Magical Items.  If a list
          of specific items cannot be loaded from disk, quits to DOS.)
1DB1 1E9A ECL opcode 28 ROB
          Operand 1: Boolean is whole party
          Operand 2: uint8 percent of carried money
          Operand 3: uint8 item chance
          (As opcode description, with issues.)
1E9B 1EB6 "~COMBAT ~WAIT ~FLEE ~PARLAY"
1EB7 1ED3 "~COMBAT ~WAIT ~FLEE ~ADVANCE"
1ED4 1EE4 "Both sides wait."
1EE5 1EF7 "The monsters flee."
1EF8 25A7 ECL opcode 29 ENCOUNTER MENU
          Operand 1: uint8 monster ID
          Operand 2: uint8 distance (0...2)
          Operand 3: uint8 picture ID
          Operand 4: destination GBVM address
          Operand 5: combat response
          Operand 6: wait response
          Operand 7: flee response
          Operand 8: advance response
          Operand 9: parley response
          Operand 10: distance 0 message
          Operand 11: distance 1 message
          Operand 12: distance 2 message
          Operand 13: movement for fleeing party
          Operand 14: movement for fleeing monsters
          (As opcode description.)
25A8 25CA "~HAUGHTY ~SLY ~NICE ~MEEK ~ABUSIVE"
25CB 2669 ECL opcode 2C PARLAY
          Operand 1...5: integer value (for haughty...abusive)
          Operand 6: GBVM address
          (Asks player to select a parley option; value placed at GBVM
          address.)
266A 271E ECL opcode 32 FIND ITEM
          Operand: uint8 item type
271F 272C ECL opcode 3A DELAY
272D 2735 "The END!"
2736 2751 "The entire party is killed!"
2752 2774 "press <enter>/<return> to continue"
2775 2AA1 ECL opcode 2E DAMAGE
          Operand 1: uint8 attack
          Operand 2: uint8 damage dice
          Operand 3: uint8 damage sides
          Operand 4: uint8 damage bonus
          Operand 5: uint8 value
          (As opcode description.  Does its own check to see if the entire
          party was killed.)
2AA2 2AC0 ECL opcode 31 SPRITE OFF
2AC1 2AEA ECL opcode 34 ECL CLOCK
          Operand: uint8
          (As opcode description; won't work as expected and never used.)
2AEB 2B13 ECL opcode 33 PRINT RETURN
2B14 2B32 ECL opcode 3D CLEAR BOX
2B33 2B7D ECL opcode 39 WHO
          Operand: message string
          (Player selects character, who becomes the current character.)
2B7E 2C02 ECL opcode 36 ADD NPC
          Operand 1: uint8 monster ID
          Operand 2: uint8 morale
          (As opcode description.)
2C03 2CCE ECL opcode 3B SPELL
          Operand 1: uint8 spell ID
          Operand 2: GBVM address 1
          Operand 3: GBVM address 2
          (As opcode description.  Has bugs and is a no-op.)
2CCF 2DD2 ECL opcode 2D CALL
          Operand: GBVM address
          (As opcode description.  Does not actually try to invoke code at
          address, instead individually interpreting valid addresses.)
2DD3 2E0F Camp
          (* Call ECL script pre_camp_check.
           * Call 2F73:1E6F camp main menu.
           * If camp was interrupted, call ECL script camp_interrupted.)
2E10 2E7C ECL opcode 38 PROGRAM
          Operand: uint8 value
          (As opcode description; any value other than 0, 8, or 9 is a no-op.)
2E7D 2F2C ECL opcode 3C PROTECTION
          Operand: GBVM address
2F2D 3170 Execute next ECL command
          (Executes the ECL command at the current ECL IP.)
3171 31B2 Call ECL script
          Parameter: uint16 GBVM address
          (Starts execution of ECL commands at the specified GBVM address,
          until either opcode 00 EXIT or opcode 20 NEWECL is executed.)
31B3 31B3 ""
31B4 32F7 ECL opcode 20 NEWECL completion handler
32F8 3507 Main game loop
          Stub: 001F:0025
          (* Set DS:49F3 interface state according to value of GBVM $49E6.
           * If a save game wasn't loaded, start a new game by loading ECL
             script 0.
           * Call 1FDC:01B6 ECL initialization.
           * Repeat until total party kill:
             * Call 2E68:0989 map main menu
             * If "E"ncamp command issued, call 19B5:2DD3 camp
             * If "L"ook command issued:
               * Backup GBVM $6DCA bit 1 to DS:84DD
               * Set GBVM $6DCA to 1
               * Call 44C1:016D display map view
               * Call ECL script search_location
               * If DS:442F set, call 19B5:31B4 NEWECL completion handler
               * Restore GBVM $6DCA from DS:84DD
             * If movement command issued:
               * Call ECL script vm_run_1
               * Copy current coordinates to GBVM $49F0 and $49F1
               * Call 2E68:0D6D resolve movement command
               * If movement occurred, play sound effect 10
               * Call ECL script search_location
               * If DS:442F set, call 19B5:31B4 NEWECL completion handler.)
3508 350C Empty function
          Stub: 001F:0020

Segment 1D06 (IDA overlay 5): (GAME.OVR - add 4577 for offset)
Temple.
Begin End
0000 0012 "cast cure anyway: "
0013 0075 Confirm casting cure spell without the problem it fixes
          Parameter: Pointer to message String describing lack of problem
          Return in AL: uint8 char code ("Y" or "N" only)
0076 0086 " will only cost "
0087 0094 " gold pieces."
0095 00A2 "pay for cure "
00A3 00B4 "Not enough money."
00B5 00BE "is cured."
00BF 022B Confirm casting cure spell checking against money
          Parameter 1: Pointer to spell String
          Parameter 2: uint16 cure cost in gold
          Return in AL: uint8 char code ("Y" or "N" only)
          ("Y" is changed to "N" if the cure cannot be afforded.  Caller is
          responsible for actually performing the cure effect.)
022C 0239 "is not blind."
023A 0248 "Cure Blindness"
0249 02CE Temple Cure Blindness
          (Removes effect 33 for 1000 gold.)
02CF 02DF "is not Diseased."
02E0 02EC "Cure Disease"
02ED 03C5 Temple Cure Disease
          (Removes effects 31, 34, 43, 44, 50, and 57 for 1000 gold.)
03D6 03D7 "Cure Light Wounds"
03D8 03EB "Cure Serious Wounds"
03EC 0400 "Cure Critical Wounds"
0401 04F7 Temple cure wounds
          Parameter: uint8 spell:
            1 Cure Light Wounds (cure 1d8 hit points for 100 gold)
            2 Cure Serious Wounds (cure 2d8+1 hit points for 350 gold)
            3 Cure Critical Wounds (cure 3d8+3 hit points for 600 gold)
04F8 0504 "is not dead."
0505 050F "Raise Dead"
0510 072D Temple Raise Dead
          (Removes Animated and Dead status, and effects 31 and 55, for 5500
          gold.  Always works, even on elves.  Reduces Constitution by 1 if
          above 0, and also maximum hit points.)
072E 073E "is not poisoned."
073F 0750 "Neutralize Poison"
0751 081D Temple Neutralize Poison
          (If victim has effect 55, removes effects 15, 22, and 55 for 1000
          gold.)
081E 082C "is not cursed."
082D 0839 "Remove Curse"
083A 0909 Temple Remove Curse
          (Invokes Remove Curse spell handler for 3500 gold.  I don't know why
          SSI did not do the same for Cure Blindness or Cure Disease.)
090A 0918 "is not stoned."
0919 0927 "Stone to Flesh"
0928 09B4 Temple Stone to Flesh
          (Removes Stoned status for 2000 gold.)
09B5 09CC ", how can we help you?"
09CD 09D6 "Heal Exit"
09D7 0C3E Temple heal menu
0C3F 0C66 "Heal View Take Pool Share Appraise Exit"
0C67 0C83 "Heal View Pool Appraise Exit"
0C84 0C84 ""
0C85 0C8D "Yes ~No"
0C8E 0CD8 "As you leave a priest says, "Excuse me but you have left some money
          here""
0CD9 0D08 "Do you want to go back and retrieve your money?"
0D09 0F31 Temple main menu
          Stub: 0022:0025
0F32 0F36 Empty function
          Stub: 0022:0020

Segment 1DFA (IDA overlay 6): (GAME.OVR - add 557E for offset)
Post-combat.
Begin End
0000 0354 Determine loot and experience
          Parameter: Pointer to int32 experience share
          Return at Pointer: raw experience share
          (* If GBVM $6DE6 mirror duel flag set:
             Experience share is hit dice times 100.  There is no loot.
           * Otherwise:
             Add monster loot to global treasure variables and calculates
             experience.  Monster loot is not added if:
             * monster was not hostile
             * monster ran away
             * (items only) GBVM $6DE3 is set to 1
             * (items only) 70% of the time if item has value of 0.)
0355 04C8 Award experience
          Parameter: int32 experience share
          (Awards bonuses for single-classed characters with high stats, or
          divides experience by number of classes.)
04C9 083B Determine combat results
          (* If normal combat won:
             * Award experience to characters who are Okay
             * Add defeated monster money and items to loot
             * Reset Running characters to Okay and back in play
             * Dying characters stabilized and are now Unconscious
             * Unconscious characters with positive HP rise and are now Okay
           * If normal combat lost:
             * All characters are permanently lost
             * Party size at GBVM $6E3E reset to 0
           * If duel:
             * Winning participants receive duel-specific experience, no loot
             * Resets characters flagged as out of play for the duel back to in
             * Dying characters stabilized and are now Unconscious
             * Does not end game if lost
           * If combat fled:
             * Reset Running characters to Okay and back in play
             * All other characters are permanently lost immediately
           * Set global variables:
             * DS:443B party fled combat flag
             * DS:49FF party defeated flag
             * DS:84D5 count of non-animated characters
             * DS:84DA combat won flag
             * GBVM $6DC7 combat result.)
083C 083C ""
083D 0854 "You have lost the duel."
0855 086B "You have won the duel."
086C 087E "The party has won."
087F 0892 "The party has fled."
0893 08B0 "The party has found Treasure!"
08B1 08C6 "The duelist receives "
08C7 08DF "Each character receives "
08E0 08F2 "experience points."
08F3 0915 "press <enter>/<return> to continue"
0916 0B01 Post combat print summary
          (Prints results of combat and how much experience was received.  Does
          not handle total party kill.)
0B02 0B06 "Loot"
0B07 0B0E "Items: "
0B0F 0B13 "Take"
0B14 0C05 Loot take item selection
          Parameter 1: Pointer to char code
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Item to take
          Parameter 3: Pointer to Pointer to selected item
          Parameter 4: Pointer to selected index
0C06 0D1F Loot take item menu
          (Submenu of loot take menu.)
0D20 0D26 "Take: "
0D27 0D37 "Money Items Exit"
0D38 0E2D Loot take menu
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Boolean money flag
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Boolean items flag
          (Submenu of loot menu.)
0E2E 0E3C "View Pool Exit"
0E3D 0E42 " Exit"
0E43 0E4F " Detect Exit"
0E50 0E64 "View Take Pool Share"
0E65 0E73 "View Take Pool"
0E74 0E7C "~Yes ~No"
0E7D 0E9C "There is still treasure left.  "
0E9D 0ECC "Do you want to go back and claim your treasure?"
0ECD 11AB Loot menu
11AC 12A7 Post combat creature cleanup
          (* For characters, frees combat information.
           * For monsters or hostile NPCs, remove from creature list and free.
           * Monsters defeated count set at GBCM $6DC8.)
12A8 12A8 ""
12A9 12C4 " takes and hides his share."
12C5 12E7 "press <enter>/<return> to continue"
12E8 14CD NPC treasure share
          (NPCs that can take treasure cause it to vanish into thin air.  The
          theoretical share is up to 7 for any NPC in OK condition that can do
          so, 1 for anyone else in the party.  The loss is less than expected,
          as an int32 is cast to uint8.  Prints messages saying who is
          responsible for making treasure disappear.  NPCs do not take items.)
14CE 14D6 "The END!"
14D7 150C "The monsters rejoice for the party has been destroyed"
150D 1526 "Press any key to continue"
1527 1670 Post combat
          Stub: 0025:0025
          (* Call 04C9 determine combat results.
           * Call 11AC post combat creature cleanup.
           * If no total party kill:
             * Call 12E8 NPC treasure share
             * Call 0916 print combat summary
             * Call 0ECD loot menu
             * Erase treasure item list and frees all its memory
           * If a total party kill happened:
             * Set GBVM $6DC7 to 128
             * Print appropriate messages
           * Reset the following GBVM variables to 0:
             * $6E70 ad hoc modifier to monster THAC0
             * $6E71 ad hoc modifier to party THAC0
             * $6E72 ad hoc modifier to party movement
             * $6DE3 combat does not prive items flag
             * $6DE6 mirror duel flag.)
1671 1675 Empty function
          Stub: 0025:0020

Segment 1F62 (IDA overlay 7): (GAME.OVR - add 6CD4 for offset)
Shop.
Begin End
001F 0023 "Shop"
0024 002B "Items: "
002C 002F "Buy"
0030 022D Shop buy item selection
          Parameter 1: Pointer to char code
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Item to buy
          Parameter 3: Pointer to Pointer to selected item
          Parameter 4: Pointer to selected index
022E 0238 "OverLoaded"
0239 034E Give item copy to creature
          Stub: 0028:002A
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Item
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Boolean creature given copy
          (Copy of item only given if creature can carry it.)
034F 0360 "Not enough Money."
0361 0473 Shop buy menu
          (Submenu of shop main menu.)
0474 049A "Buy View Take Pool Share Appraise Exit"
049B 04B6 "Buy View Pool Appraise Exit"
04B7 04BF "~Yes ~No"
04C0 0512 "As you Leave the Shopkeeper says, "Excuse me but you have Left
          Some Money here.""
0513 053D "Do you want to go back and get your Money?"
053E 0797 Shop main menu
          Stub: 0028:0025
0798 079C Empty function
          Stub: 0028:0020

Segment 1FDC (IDA overlay 8): (GAME.OVR - add 74D3 for offset)
Begin End
0000 0135 Load ECL variables
          Stub: 002B:002A
          Parameter: uint8 count of ECL variables to read
          (ECL IP is before the variables to be read.  References are converted
          into values.  Variable type is put in the DS:7006 array, variable
          values are placed in DS:7086 and DS:7046 arrays, string values
          are placed in the DS:70C8 array.  ECL IP is advanced appropriately.)
0136 01B5 Get ECL variable
          Stub: 002B:0025
          Parameter: int8 variable index (1...64)
          Return in AX: uint16 value if integer,
                               length of encoded GB string if string value,
                               GBVM address if string reference
          (Uses currently loaded ECL variables for values.)
01B6 0321 ECL initialization
          Stub: 002B:002F
          (* Reset the ECL call stack.
           * Set Booleans at DS:6F78...6F7D to 0.
           * Set GBVM $6DE1 picture loading to 255.
           * Set GVM $6DD2/6DD3 rest interruption both to 0.
           * Load DS:49E3/49E5/49E7/49E9/49EB pointers to ECL script.
           * Set ECL IP to $9914.
           * Set GBVM $49E6 outdoors flag to 1, even though it's usually 0.
           * If not loading a saved game, reset $4A00...4A1F to 0.
0322 0337 "Loading...Please Wait"
0338 033B "ECL"
033C 0340 ".dax"
0341 0410 Load ECL script
          Stub: 002B:0034
          Parameter: uint8 ECL script ID
          (Loads ECL script from ECL?.DAX from disk, where ? is the current
          disk number.  Does nothing else to initialize the script.)
0411 0481 Initialize creature
          Stub: 002B:0039
          Parameter 1: uint8 creature ID
          Parameter 2: Pointer 1 to Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 3: Pointer 2 to Pointer to creature inventory
          Parameter 4: Pointer 3 to Pointer to creature effects
          (Allocates memory for creature and loads it, its inventory, and its
          effects from disk, setting the provided pointers appropriately.)
0482 0510 Maximum monster distance
          Stub: 002B:003E
          Parameter 1: int8 Party X-coordinate
          Parameter 2: int8 Party Y-coordinate
          Parameter 3: uint8 facing (0...7)
          Return in AL: uint8 maximum distance (0...2)
          (This is the farthest away monsters can be in front of the party,
          accounting for any obstacles in front of it.)
0511 0543 Display portrait
          Stub: 002B:0043
          Parameter 1: uint8 portrait head file ID (in CHEAD?.DAX)
          Parameter 2: uint8 portrait body file ID (in CBODY?.DAX)
0544 0549 "SPRIT"
054A 054D "PIC"
054E 06AE Display monster picture or sprite
          Stub: 002B:0048
          Parameter 1: uint8 monster ID
          Parameter 2: uint8 monster picture ID (in PIC?.DAX or SPRIT?.DAX)
          Parameter 3: uint8 distance (0...2)
          Parameter 4: Pointer to unknown size-2 Boolean array (always DS:84C8)
          (PIC?.DAX is only for distance 0; SPRIT?.DAX is for any of distance
          0...2.)
06AF 06D2 Convert 2 uint8 to 1 uint16
          Stub: 002B:004D
          Parameter 1: uint8 lower byte
          Parameter 2: uint8 upper byte
          Return in AX: uint16 (256 * upper byte) + lower byte
06D3 06FA Convert GB char to char
          Parameter: uint8 GB char
          Return in AL: uint8 char code
          (Adds 64 if parameter is 0...31, otherwise returns unchanged.)
06FB 0755 Convert GBVM address to GBVM zone
          Parameter: uint16 GBVM address
          Return in AL: 0 if $4900...4CFF
                        1 if $6B00...6EFF
                        2 if $9700...98FF
                        3 if $9900...B6FF (ECL script)
                        4 if anything else (most such values are not valid)
0756 07BB Find index of current character
          Return in AL: index of current character
07BC 0A73 Special read value handling for GBVM zone 1 ($6B00...$6EFF)
          Parameter 1: uint16 GBVM address
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Boolean special handler
          Return in AX: retrieved value
          Return at Pointer: True if special handler found
0A74 0C76 Special write value handling for GBVM zone 1 ($6B00...$6EFF)
          Parameter 1: uint16 GBVM address
          Parameter 2: uint16 value
0C77 0E0B Write value to GBVM address
          Parameter 1: uint16 GBVM address
          Parameter 2: uint16 value
          (Special integer write handling to GBVM zone 1 will always write to
          the GBVM *and* whatever the special handler dictates.)
0E0C 0F52 Read GBVM address
          Stub: 002B:0057
          Parameter: uint16 GBVM address
          Return in AX: retrieved value
          (It is caller's responsibility to know whether this address is 8-bit
          or 16-bit.  An unrecognized address will return the contents of an
          uninitialized stack variable.  If special read handling from GBVM
          zone 1 is triggered, the GBVM is usually completely ignored.)
0F53 1152 Write String to GBVM address
          Stub: 002B:005C
          Parameter 1: uint16 GBVM address (must be in GBVM zones 0...3)
          Parameter 2: Pointer to String
          (Strings are copied to the GBVM as C strings; exception: GBVM address
          $6B00, character name, which is copied directly to character data as
          a normal Pascal String but not to the GBVM.  Byte size is always
          standard for that zone otherwise: 16-bit bytes for zones 0...2, 8-bit
          bytes for zone 3.)
1153 12FA Convert GB string to String
          Parameter 1: uint8 encoded string length
          Parameter 2: uint8 GBVM variable string array index
          (Decodes String as ASCII in DS:70C8 array.)
12FB 154C Dereference GB string
          Parameter 1: uint8 GBVM variable string array index
          Parameter 2: uint16 GBVM address (must be in GBVM zones 0...3)
          (Strings are copied from the GBVM as C strings; exception: GBVM
          address $6B00, character name, which is copied as a Pascal String.
          String is copied to the DS:70C8 array.)
154D 156C Set of digits and uppercase letters
156D 1663 Convert menu string to menu option string
          Parameter 1: Pointer to menu String
          Parameter 2: Pointer to menu option String
          (Performs two operations:
           * Converts all uppercase letters in menu String to lowercase.
             This does not gracefully handle digits.
           * Generates menu option String, consisting of all the letters in the
             menu String that are preceded by '~', converted to uppercase.)
1664 1683 Set of digits and uppercase letters
1684 1787 Horizontal menu with character selection
          Stub: 002B:0061
          Parameter 1: Pointer to query String
          Parameter 2: Pointer to menu String
          Parameter 3: uint8 query color (0...15)
          Parameter 4: uint8 menu normal color (0...15)
          Parameter 5: uint8 menu highlight color (0...15)
          Parameter 6: Boolean Enter key allowed
          Parameter 7: Boolean animate animation data
          Return in AL: uint8 index of selection (255 if no selection)
          (Unlike 439C:03BD, menu options must be preceded by '~'.)
1788 1814 ECL vertical menu
          Stub: 002B:0066
          Parameter 1: Pointer to query String
          Parameter 2: Pointer to menu String
          Parameter 3: uint8 query color (0...15)
          Parameter 4: uint8 menu normal color (0...15)
          Parameter 5: uint8 menu highlight color (0...15)
          Parameter 6: int8 upper left char column
          Parameter 7: int8 upper left char row
          Parameter 8: int8 lower right char column
          Parameter 9: int8 lower right char row
          Parameter 10: Pointer to String linked list of menu choices
          Parameter 11: Boolean flag to add Exit to horizontal menu
          Parameter 12: Pointer 1 to Boolean unknown
          Parameter 13: Pointer 2 to int16 index
          Parameter 14: Pointer 3 to Pointer to selected String
          Return at Pointer 2: uint16 index of selected String in list
                               (0 if Escape/Exit)
          Return at Pointer 3: Pointer to selected String
                               (nil if Escape/Exit)
          (Unlike 1FDC:1788, does not return anything in AL, but is otherwise
          functionally identical.)
1815 18EA ECL COMPARE strings
          Stub: 002B:006B
          Parameter 1: Pointer to String 1
          Parameter 2: Pointer to String 2
          (Sets flags at DS:6F78...6F7D appropriately.)
18EB 1950 ECL COMPARE integers
          Stub: 002B:0070
          Parameter 1: uint16 1
          Parameter 2: uint16 2
          (Sets flags at DS:6F78...6F7D appropriately.)
1951 19DA ECL GOSUB
          Stub: 002B:002A
          Parameter: uint8 GBVM variable index
          (Creates new return address object and puts it at the top of the
          ECL call stack, pointing it to the previous such record if there is
          one.  The structure of such records is the GBVM address then the
          pointer to the object below it.  ECL IP is then moved to the address
          in the provided ECL variable index.)
19DB 1A64 ECL move forward
          Stub: 002B:007F
          (ECL opcode 2D CALL $C01E, as in opcode description.)
1A65 1A69 "CPIC"
1A6A 1A6E "ROLF"
1A6F 1CC2 Character fights alone setup
          Parameter: Boolean is mirror duel
          (Any party member whose name does not match the current character is
          flagged out of play.  Then:
          * If not a mirror duel, return immediately; the ECL script is
            expected to handle loading monsters.
          * If a mirror duel: character is cloned, made hostile, and renamed
            ROLF.  Items are fully cloned but effects are not.)
1CC3 1DEF Rob money
          Stub: 002B:0084
          Parameter 1: Real fraction of money retained
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Creature
          (Reduces all carried money of Creature to fraction.)
1DF0 1EA5 Rob items
          Stub: 002B:0089
          Parameter 1: uint8 item chance
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Creature
1EA6 1FB0 Skip next ECL command
          Stub: 002B:008E
          (Skips the next ECL command, loading the command following it to
          the current ECL opcode and variables.  ECL IP is moved to the command
          following that.  Some opcodes will not function right, as opcode
          description.)
1FB1 207D Determine movement extremes
          Stub: 002B:0093
          Parameter 1: Pointer 1 to uint8
          Parameter 2: Pointer 2 to uint8
          (Highest movement in creature list is placed at Pointer 1.  Lowest
          movement in creature list is placed at Pointer 2.  For this purpose,
          haste and slow both apply, but not GBVM $6E72.)
207E 2080 "  "
2081 2088 " dies. "
2089 2095 " is hit FOR "
2096 20A8 " points of Damage."
20A9 20CB "press <enter>/<return> to continue"
20CC 2214 ECL script inflict damage
          Stub: 002B:0098
          Parameter 1: uint8 damage
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Creature
          (Also displays message, with a pause if the message window is full,
          and updates UI.)
2215 2219 Empty function
          Stub: 002B:0020

Segment 21FE (IDA overlay 9): (GAME.OVR - add 9807 for offset)
Combat.
Begin End
0000 0079 Combat done cleanup
          (* Empty and free Stinking Cloud linked list.
           * Set palette to noncombat.
           * Set cast spell target UI function pointer to noncombat.
           Doesn't handle any actual game logic; can't perform monster cleanup
           as monsters are still needed.)
007A 0130 Combat main
          Stub: 0035:0025
          (Main combat logic, surprisingly short for something so central:
           * Call 24B9:1E31 combat start.
           * Set cast spell UI function pointer to combat.
           * Repeat until combat is over:
             * Call 2AA0:0000 combat round start
             * Reset GBVM $6DCB surprise to 0
             * Repeat until round is over:
               * Call 0131 determine next creature to act
               * Call 01F6 creature action
             * Call 0880 combat end of round
           * Call 0000 combat done cleanup.)
0131 01F5 Combat determine next creature to act
          Parameter: Pointer to Pointer to Creature
          Return at Pointer: Pointer to next Creature
          (Highest initiative goes first; ties are broken first by unmodified
          1d100 roll, then by whatever creature is further down the list.  That
          means the monsters win all initiative ties, although ties seldom
          happen.)
01F6 02F4 Combat creature action
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          (* Set guarding flag to 0.
           * Trigger helplessness effects; returns if any trigger.
           * Recalculate creature statistics.
           * Print creature information.
           * Trigger start of combat round effects.
           * Call 031A if player-controlled, ABC0:000F creature AI otherwise.)
02F5 02FD "Magic On"
02FE 0307 "Magic Off"
0308 0319 "That doesn't work"
031A 05F8 Combat creature action manual control
05F9 05FE "Move "
05FF 0608 "View Aim "
0609 060D "Use "
060E 0613 "Cast "
0614 0619 "Turn "
061A 0624 "Quick Done"
0625 0625 ""
0626 0645 Set of accepted scan codes not including commands
0646 0665 Set of accepted scan codes
0666 0857 Combat menu
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to unknown 8-bit
0858 086E "Your Teammate is Dying"
086F 087F "Continue Battle:"
0880 09B3 Combat end of round
          Parameter: Pointer to Boolean combat done flag
          Return in Pointer: if combat done
          (* Advance time by 1 minute.
           * Reduce duration of effects by 1 minute, triggering any effects
             that activate when the timer reaches 0.
           * Increment combat round counter.
           * Call 2AA0:2879 calculats remaining hostile creature hit points.
           * For each creature:
             * Trigger effects that happen at the end of a combat round
             * Call 4208:0AE7 consider whether it is affected by Stinking Cloud
             * If dying, lose 1 hit point; set status to Dead if -10 is reached
           * If no hostile creatures remain, ask if battle should continue.)
09B4 09CD "Move/Attack, Move Left = "
09CE 09CF " "
09D0 09D0 ""
09D1 09D6 "Flee:"
09D7 09DE "Blocked"
09DF 0D2F Combat move menu
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to done this round flag
0D30 0D44 "Not with that weapon"
0D45 0DFD Combat manual control melee attack
          Parameter 1: Pointer to attacking Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to defending Creature
          Parameter 3: Pointer to unknown
0DFE 0E04 "Guard "
0E05 0E10 "Delay Quit "
0E11 0E19 "Bandage "
0E1A 0E24 "Speed Exit"
0E25 0E44 (unknown Set)
0E45 0FF2 Combat done menu
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to unknown
0FF3 0FFE "is bandaged"
0FFF 10AE Combat identify and bandage dying characters
          Parameter: Boolean bandage flag
          Return in AL: Boolean if any character was dying (True even if the
            only dying character was just bandaged)
          (Determine whether there exist any dying characters.  If the bandage
          flag is set, bandages the first dying character, setting HP to 0 and
          status to Unconscious.  Range or line of sight are not considered.)
10AF 10CE (unknown Set)
10CF 10DA "GameSpeed ("
10DB 10DE ") :"
10DF 10E0 " "
10E1 10E8 "Slower "
10E9 10F0 "Faster "
10F1 10F5 "Exit"
10F6 122A Combat speed menu
122B 1279 Creature turn on autocombat
          (Also sets Pointer to other creature to nil, if it is on the same
          side.)
127A 127E Empty function
          Stub: 0035:0020

Segment 2326 (IDA overlay 10): (GAME.OVR - add ABC0 for offset)
Combat AI.
Begin End
0000 000E "flees in panic"
000F 0202 Combat creature action AI control
          Stub: 0038:0025
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          (* Check morale.
           * Select an item to use; end turn if item used.
           * If a spell cast previously takes effect this segment, cast spell,
             then end turn.
           * Turn undead; end turn if turn undead attempt made.
           * Select a spell to cast; end turn if one was selected and it is
             cast immediately.
           * Attack/move/guard.)
0203 0254 Combat AI turn undead
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: Boolean turned undead
          (If the combat AI gets here, it will always have the creature turn
          undead if it can and if there are any turnable undead.)
02EB 03E3 Combat AI decide whether to cast spell
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 spell ID (1...67)
          Parameter 3: uint8 minimum AI priority (1...7)
          Return in AL: Boolean
          (Includes item use.)
03E4 0544 Combat AI select item to use
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: Boolean item used
          (Rolls 1d7 for the lowest AI priority to consider.  Loops first from
          7 to lowest AI priority, then through inventory; if any item is
          found that is high enough AI priority, the AI attempts to use that
          item.)
0545 0674 Combat AI select spell to cast
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: Boolean spell cast
          (Rolls 1d7 for the lowest AI priority to consider.  Loops first from
          7 to lowest AI priority, then through 4 memorized spells chosen at
          random; if any spell is found that is high enough AI priority, the AI
          attempts to cast that spell.)
0F4F 0FAD Combat AI finish round
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: Boolean True
          (* Call 00BA:2637 end creature actions this combat round, if any
             of the following apply:
             * Creature is helpless
             * Creature has a ranged weapon equipped
             * Creature has initiative 0
           * Call 00BA:2686 creature guard, otherwise.)
0FAE 0FB6 "Magic On"
0FB7 0FC0 "Magic Off"
0FC1 10B9 Combat check for keystroke interrupt
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: Boolean character had autocombat turned off
          (Checked keys are Alt-M, Alt-X, and Space.)
10BA 10CB "is forced to flee"
10CC 10D6 "Surrenders"
10D7 128C Combat AI check morale
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: Boolean surrendered
          (Triggers morale effects, checks morale, and makes decision on
          whether to flee or surrender.)
128D 13C9 Combat AI calculate weapon priority
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Item
          Return in AL: uint8 weapon priority
          (* Special cases checked for that always return 0:
             * Item requires too many hands for creature to equip
             * Item is aligned weapon that does not match creature
             * Javelin of Lightning
             * Item is cursed, even if the item is not identified
           * Start with small/medium weapon dice multiplied by small/medium
             weapon sides.
           * Add 8 multiplied by any positive magical bonus.
           * Add 2 multiplied by any positive small/medium weapon bonus.
           * Set to 8 if item is Holy Water and other creature is vulnerable to
             turning.
           * If bit 8 of weapon bitmask set, add 2 * (rate of fire x2 - 1).
           * Add 3 if weapon is one-handed.
          Large weapon damage is not considered.)
13CA 1921 Combat AI equip weapon and shield
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          (* Calculate highest ranged weapon priority by call to 128D.
           * Calculate highest melee weapon priority by call to 128D; the
             default melee weapon is bare hands, with a weapon priority of 2.
           * Calculate highest shield priority as highest non-negative.
           * If highest ranged weapon priority is a bow without arrows, or a
             crossbow without bolts, ranged weapons are not considered.
           * Defaults to melee weapon if:
             * there is no ranged weapon to consider; or
             * highest ranged weapon priority is less than or equal to half of
               highest melee weapon priority
           * If highest ranged weapon priority is a throwable melee weapon, it
             is chosen.
           * Otherwise, the best melee weapon is chosen if there are any
             enemies within melee range, else the best ranged weapon is chosen.
           * Changing weapons now happens, but only if the current equipped
             weapon is both a different weapon and is not cursed.
           * If it is possible to equip a better shield than any current
             shield, that also now happens.)
1922 1926 Empty function
          Stub: 0038:0020

Segment 24B9 (IDA overlay 11): (GAME.OVR - add C5D1 for offset)
Begin End
122C 1233 "DungCom"
1234 123B "WildCom"
123C 1243 "RandCom"
1244 12E0 Combat load 2D map tile set
12E1 1402 Combat start initialize creatures
          (For all creatures:
           * Initialize combat information.
           * Set not PC or NPC flag.
           * Set direction; allies and hostiles always face each other.
           * Set morale for friendly allies that are not PCs or NPCs.)
1E1E 1E30 "A battle begins..."
1E31 1F8C Combat start
          Stub: 003B:0025
          (* Print "A battle begins..."
           * Set GBVM $6E33 (attacked allies) to 0.
           * Call 12E1 combat start initialize creatures.
           * Trigger any start of combat effects.)
1F8D 1F91 Empty function
          Stub: 003B:0020

Segment 26B3 (IDA overlay 12): (GAME.OVR - add E5D3 for offset)
Game initialization 2.
Begin End
0000 0015 "Loading...Please Wait"
0016 001D "sqrpaci"
001E 0024 "COMSPR"
0025 002A "ITEMS"
002B 002C ":"
002D 0614 Game initialization 2
          (* Allocate and clear memory for the GBVM:
             * 2048 bytes for GBVM zone 0 ($4900...4CFF, 16-bit bytes)
             * 2048 bytes for GBVM zone 1 ($6B00...6EFF, 16-bit bytes)
             * 1024 bytes for GBVM zone 2 ($9700...98FF, 16-bit bytes)
             * 7680 bytes for GBVM zone 3 ($9900...B6FF, 8-bit bytes)
           * Allocate and clear 2340 bytes for 3D wall graphics.
           * Allocate and clear 1024 bytes for 3D map.
           * Allocate memory for image buffers:
             * Current 8x8 symbol (8x8 pixels)
             * View area (168x168 pixels)
             * Combat icons (24x24 pixels each)
           * Define CGA and Tandy segment arrays (even if using EGA).
           * Define EGA offset array (even if using CGA or Tandy).
           * Initialize DS:6ABE animation data.
           * Set default coordinates to (15,1) facing west in New Phlan.
           * Set default settings: DS:49F5 portraits on, DS:49F6 monster
             pictures on, DS:49E2 delay 1.
           * Set DS:6DDE door opening array all to 1.
           * Call 0709:017C load game font.
           * Load default 8x8 symbol sets.
           * Load default 2D tile set.
           * Load ITEMS.
           * Call 0A48:1247 initialize RNG.
           * Call 3E45:3413 initialize spell function pointers.
           * Call 2715:31A2 initialize effect function pointers.)
0615 0619 Empty function
          Stub: 003E:0020

Segment 2715 (IDA overlay 13): (GAME.OVR - add EC5B for offset)
Effect handling.  Most of these functions are invoked via the function pointer
array at DS:682C, which has 139 entries; these in turn are usually called from
4208:02FA trigger effects with condition.  All such effect handlers have the
following signature:
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Item *or* Effect
          Parameter 3: Boolean item unreadied *or* effect being removed
Begin End
0000 001E Nullify attack with effect ID
          Parameter: uint8 effect ID
          (If effect ID 0, check always succeeds.  Otherwise checks ID against
          current effect to check for; if they match, both damage and effect
          to check for are set to 0.)
001F 0057 Add effect if no effect lock
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 effect ID
          Parameter 3: uint8 effect strength
          Parameter 4: uint16 minutes remaining of effect
          Return in AL: Boolean if effect added
          (Calls 4208:0E52 to create effect, but only if the DS:681F effect
          lock flag is not on.  The parameter order is not the same.  Always
          sets effect removal calls effect handler to True.)
0058 010C Inflict status condition with message
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 status condition (6...8)
          Parameter 3: Pointer to String
          (Calls 16EC to display the message.  Does not change status condition
          if it is already 6...8.  Otherwise:
           * Inflict status.
           * Set hit points to 0.
           * Call 4208:100A remove effects after HP 0.
           * Trigger effects that occur upon being reduced to 0 HP.
           * Call 0 HP sound and graphics routines.)
010D 011C Bless effect handler
          Stub: 0041:002A
          Effect ID: 1
          (Increases morale by 5, and attack roll by 1.)
011D 013A Curse effect handler
          Stub: 0041:002F
          Effect ID: 2
          (Decreases morale by 5, minimum 0, and attack roll by 1.)
013B 016E Undead slaying weapon effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0034
          Effect ID: 3
          (If targeted creature is undead, increases both attack roll and
          damage by 2 each.)
016F 017E "starts to train"
017F 01C2 Starting to train with Manual of Bodily Health effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0039
          Effect ID: 4
          (Adds 43200 minutes of effect 7.)
01C3 0227 Flame tongue weapon effect handler
          Stub: 0041:003E
          Effect ID: 6
          (If regenerating, adds 1 to both attack roll and damage; if
          cold-based or avian, adds 2 to both; if undead, adds 3 to both.  Also
          sets element bitmask to magical fire.  The handler code looks correct
          to me; it just never triggers as it should.)
0228 0232 "is hardier"
0233 0376 Training with Manual of Body Health effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0043
          Effect ID: 7
          (Increases creature Constitution by 1.  Adds 60 minutes of effect 62
          if Constitution is now 20+.  Adjusts current and maximum HP, but
          this has several bugs: there is no check for Constitution hit point
          penalties; fighters do not get enough credit for Constitution
          15...19; there is no adjustment for number of classes; the adjustment
          is computed by division, not subtraction.)
0377 03AB Protection from Evil effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0048
          Effect ID: 8, 45
          (If current creature is evil, increases saving throw by 2, and
          decreases attack roll by 2.)
03AC 03E0 Protection from Good effect handler
          Stub: 0041:004D
          Effect ID: 9, 46
          (If current creature is good, increases saving throw by 2, and
          decreases attack roll by 2.)
03E1 03FF Resist Cold effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0052
          Effect ID: 10
          (If resistance bitmask bit 2 set, divides damage by 2, and increases
          saving throw by 3.)
0400 04B9 Charm effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0057
          Effect ID: 11
          (Handles both removing and adding effect:
           * Removing effect: restore original hostility flag, reset
             morale/status to 179 or 0/100.  This may not work right for NPCs.
           * Adding effect: save original hostility flag.)
04BA 05D5 Extra Strength effect handler
          Stub: 0041:005C
          Effect ID: 12, 38
          (Sets creature Strength to use highest Strength-modifying effect.
          Does not mark other Strength-modifying effects as not the highest.)
05D6 05EA Friends effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0061
          Effect ID: 14
          (Sets creature Charisma to effect strength.)
05EB 0646 Slow Poison damage effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0066
          Effect ID: 15
          (Re-adds this effect for 10 minutes, then inflicts 1 point of
          irresistible damage if the creature has at least 2 hit points.)
0647 064D Read Magic effect handler (empty function)
          Stub: 0041:006B
          Effect ID: 16
064E 0678 Shield effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0070
          Effect ID: 17
          (* Set damage to 0 if spell being cast is Magic Missile, and is not
             from a wand.
           * Add 1 to saving throw.
           * Set Armor Class to 3 if that is better.)
0679 06E3 Gnome THAC0 bonus effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0075
          Effect ID: 18
          (Adds 1 to attack roll if the currently targeted creature is a
          kobold or goblin, defined as its name being a match for a member of
          the size-4 array at DS:0342.  This doesn't work properly against a
          GOBLIN GUARD.)
06E4 0702 Resist Fire effect handler
          Stub: 0041:007A
          Effect ID: 20
          (If resistance bitmask bit 1 set, divides damage by 2, and increases
          saving throw by 3.)
0703 070E "is silenced"
070F 0763 Silence, 15' Radius effect handler
          Stub: 0041:007F
          Effect ID: 21
          (Sets byte 1 and 2 of combat information to 0.)
0764 0774 "dies from poison"
0775 07D1 Slow Poison expiration effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0084
          Effect ID: 22
          (If effect 55 is present, kills the character and removes effect 15.
          Does not remove effect 55.)
07D2 07DF "Gains an item"
07E0 0917 Spiritual Hammer effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0089
          Effect ID: 23
          (The hammer always has a +1 magical bonus.  A creature can't get a
          Spiritual Hammer while already holding one, or with a full
          inventory.)
0918 0946 Invisibility effect handler
          Stub: 0041:008E
          Effect ID: 25
          (Checks if current creature has effect 24, and turns off the
          ability to target if it does.  Always reduces attack roll by 4
          regardless.)
0947 09B1 Dwarf THAC0 bonus effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0093
          Effect ID: 26
          (Adds 1 to attack roll if the currently targeted creature is a
          half-orc, goblin, hobgoblin, or orc, defined as its name being a
          match for a member of the size-8 array at DS:0382.  This doesn't work
          properly against a GOBLIN GUARD, HOBGOBLIN LDR, or GRISHNAK.)
09B2 09BF "lost an image"
09C0 0A3C Mirror Image effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0098
          Effect ID: 28
          (Only effective against targeted spells, unlike later games.)
0A3D 0A58 Ray of Enfeeblement effect handler
          Stub: 0041:009D
          Effect ID: 29
          (Reduces damage by 25%.)
0A59 0A64 "is coughing"
0A65 0B10 Coughing from Stinking Cloud effect handler
          Stub: 0041:00A2
          Effect ID: 30
          (Removes all bonuses from Dexterity and shield, and inflicts a +4
          penalty to AC on top of that; also prevents spellcasting.)
0B11 0B1A "collapses"
0B1B 0BAB Animate Dead effect handler
          Stub: 0041:00A7
          Effect ID: 32
          (Upon removal, for affected animated creature:
           * Set status to Dead.
           * Restore original hostility flag.
           * Remove vulnerability to turn undead.
           * Creature type is set to 0 (humanoid).
           * Base movement is set to 12.)
0BAC 0BCE Blind effect handler
          Stub: 0041:00AC
          Effect ID: 33
          (Decreases attack roll and saving throw by 4 each; penalizes
          both regular AC and back AC by 4 as well.)
0BCF 0C05 Diseased effect handler
          Stub: 0041:00B1
          Effect ID: 34
          (Calls effect handler for effect 43 Strength drain, and
          effect 44 hit point drain.)
0C06 0C14 Affected by allied Prayer effect handler
          Stub: 0041:00B6
          Effect ID: 35
          (Increases attack roll and saving throw by 1 each.)
0C15 0C25 Bestow Curse effect handler
          Stub: 0041:00BB
          Effect ID: 36
          (Decreases attack roll and saving throw by 4 each.)
0C26 0C45 Blinking effect handler
          Stub: 0041:00C0
          Effect ID: 37
          (If action hasn't already been taken this round, suppresses ability
          to target and sets attack roll to -1.)
0C46 0C4A "ages"
0C4B 0CA7 Hasted effect handler
          Stub: 0041:00C5
          Effect ID: 39
          (Ages the creature by 1 year if that hasn't yet happened.  Doubles
          movement or physical attacks.)
0CA8 0CC2 "The air clears a little..."
0CC3 0FA1 Cast Stinking Cloud effect handler
          Stub: 0041:00CA
          Effect ID: 40
          (Removes Stinking Cloud this creature is responsible for.)
0FA2 0FAB "Avoids it"
0FAC 101C Avoid ranged physical attack
          Parameter 1: uint8 percent chance to avoid physical attack
          Parameter 2: Pointer to targeted creature
101D 1085 Find damaging weapon
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in DX:AX: Pointer to damaging weapon
          (Arrows with bow, bolts with crossbow, equipped primary weapon
          otherwise if neither, nil otherwise.)
1086 10C0 Protection from Normal Missiles effect handler
          Stub: 0041:00CF
          Effect ID: 41
10C1 10D1 Slowed effect handler
          Stub: 0041:00D4
          Effect ID: 42
          (Halves movement or physical attacks.)
10D2 10DD "is weakened"
10DE 1167 Disease Strength drain effect handler
          Stub: 0041:00D9
          Effect ID: 43
          (Re-adds this effect for 60 minutes, subject to effect lock.  If
          effect was re-added, creature Strength decreases by 1 if above 3,
          otherwise effect 31 is added indefinitely.)
1168 11F8 Disease hit point drain effect handler
          Stub: 0041:00DE
          Effect ID: 44
          (Re-adds this effect for 10 minutes, subject to effect lock.  If
          effect was re-added, hit points decrease by 1 if at least 2,
          otherwise effect 31 is added indefinitely.)
11F9 1267 Dwarf/gnome AC bonus vs. giants effect handler
          Stub: 0041:00E3
          Effect ID: 47
          (Applies only if current creature is a type 1 monstrous humanoid, and
          whose icon has width 1 and height 2.  Then the other creature name
          is checked against the array at DS:0402; if there is a match,
          decreases attack roll by 4.  The loop goes to 8 even though only 5
          entries are defined.  Also, I'm not sure why "current creature" and
          "other creature" both get checked here.)
1268 126F "BUGBEAR"
1270 1275 "GNOLL"
1276 12B1 Gnome AC bonus vs. bugbears and gnolls effect handler
          Stub: 0041:00E8
          Effect ID: 48
          (If the current creature is a type 1 monstrous humanoid, and its name
          is either "BUGBEAR" or "GNOLL", decreases attack roll by 4.)
12B2 12FA Prayer effect handler
          Stub: 0041:00ED
          Effect ID: 49
          (If effect hostility flag matches caster, invokes effect 35;
          otherwise decrease both attack roll and saving throw by 1.)
12FB 133E Mummy rot magical healing prevention effect handler
          Stub: 0041:00F2
          Effect ID: 50
          (Re-adds this effect for 10 days, subject to effect lock; if re-added
          heals 1 hit point.)
133F 1354 Helpless effect handler
          Stub: 0041:00F7
          Effect ID: 31, 51, 52, 53
          (Calls 00BA:2637 end creature actions this combat round.)
1355 136B Bronze dragon repulsion effect handler (empty function)
          Stub: 0041:00FC
          Effect ID: 54
          (Not implemented.)
136C 1362 Poisoned effect handler (empty function)
          Stub: 0041:0101
          Effect ID: 55
1363 1381 Wearing Ring of Invisibility effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0106
          Effect ID: 56
          (Adds effect 25 for 1 minute.)
1382 138F "Rots..."
138A 1398 "Dies rots away"
1399 1451 Mummy rot degeneration effect handler
          Stub: 0041:010B
          Effect ID: 57
          (Nothing happens if effect lock is active.  Otherwise:
           * Reduce creature Charisma by 2, to a minimum of 3.
           * If not yet time to die, re-apply effect for 43200 minutes.
           * If time to die, permanently kill creature.)
1452 1471 Immobile effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0110
          Effect ID: 58
          (Prevents creature from moving.  Also cancels attack if DS:681D is
          set.)
1472 148F Troll add regeneration effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0115
          Effect ID: 59
          (Adds effect 98.)
1490 14EA Wearing Ring of Fire Resistance effect handler
          Stub: 0041:011F
          Effect ID: 61
          (Reduces damage per die by 2, to a minimum of 1 per die.  Reduces
          damage to 0 if magic-resistant.)
14EB 152E Regenerating from high Constitution effect handler
          Stub: 0041:011F
          Effect ID: 62
          (Reapplies effect for 60 minutes, subject to effect lock, then
          restores 1 hit point to creature.)
152F 153A "is Poisoned"
153B 1544 "is killed"
1545 15DB Poison attack
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: int8 save modifier
          (Creature rolls saving throw versus poison.  Nothing happens if it
          succeeds; otherwise the creature gets effect 55 indefinitely then is
          killed.)
15DE 15EA "is Paralyzed"
15EB 155C Paralysis attack
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint16 minutes of paralysis
          Parameter 3: int8 save modifier (unreferened)
          (Creature rolls saving throw versus paralysis.  Nothing happens if it
          succeeds; otherwise the creature gets effect 52 for the specified
          number of minutes.  The save modifier parameter is not actually
          referenced.)
165D 1670 Melee poison attack with no save modifier effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0124
          Effect ID: 64
1671 1684 Melee poison attack with +4 save modifier effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0129
          Effect ID: 65
1685 1698 Melee poison attack with +2 save modifier effect handler
          Stub: 0041:012E
          Effect ID: 66
1699 16BA Melee paralysis attack by thri-kreen effect handler
          Stub: 0041:012E
          Effect ID: 67
          (Calls 155C, adding effect 52 for 2d8 minutes.)
16BB 16E5 Melee paralysis attack by ghoul effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0133
          Effect ID: 68
          (If creature is not an elf, calls 155C, which adds effect 52 for 63
          minutes.)
16E6 170A Melee paralysis attack by drider effect handler
          Stub: 0041:013D
          Effect ID: 69
          (Calls 155C, adding effect 52 for 10+1d9 minutes.  Passes unused -2
          save modifier.)
170B 171E Melee poison attack with -2 save modifier effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0142
          Effect ID: 70
171F 172F Dust of Disappearance effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0147
          Effect ID: 71
          (Unconditionally both turns off the ability to target, and reduces
          attack roll by 4.)
1730 175D Camouflaged effect handler (Cloak of Elvenkind)
          Stub: 0041:014C
          Effect ID: 72
          (95% of the time, confers effect 25 for 1 minute.  No check for
          whether the creature is outside.)
175E 176E "Sucks some Blood"
176F 18B4 Blood drain effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0151
          Effect ID: 75
          (Inflicts 1d4 damage upon victim.  If total damage caused by this
          effect is at least 12, effect is removed.)
18B5 1927 Blood drain attachment effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0156
          Effect ID: 76
          (* Add 207 minutes of effect 75 to this attacker; the upper 4 bits of
             this are the damage clock, effect strength is already used as the
             index of the victim.
           * Add effect 58 to victim and triggers it.)
1928 1934 "is held fast"
1935 19D8 Bite and hold effect handler
          Stub: 0041:015B
          Effect ID: 77
          (No effect if victim has Strength 19 or more.  Adds effect 74, then
          adds and triggers effect 58 on victim.)
19D9 1A18 Healed from unconscious to positive HP effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0160
          Effect ID: 78
          (For Slow Poison, not other means of healing.)
1A19 1A4B Melee fire touch effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0165
          Effect ID: 79
          (Inflicts additional 2d10 magical fire damage.)
1A4C 1A7E Melee acid squirt effect handler
          Stub: 0041:016A
          Effect ID: 80
          (Inflifcts additional 1d4 acid damage.)
1A7F 1A95 "is paralyzed with fear"
1A96 1AA9 "is weakened by fear"
1AAA 1B90 Dragon fear aura effect handler
          0041:016F
          Effect ID: 81
          (* Opponents with 0...3 HD must save vs. spell or receive effect 52
             indefinitely.
           * Opponents with 4...5 HD must save vs. spell or receive effect 2
             indefinitely.
           No effect on opponents with 6+ HD.)
1B91 1BA7 "is paralyzed with fear"
1BA8 1C8C Mummy fear aura effect handler
          0041:0174
          Effect ID: 82
          (Opponents must save vs. paralysis or receive effect 52 for 1d4
          minutes.  Everyone in a party of 6 gets a +1 saving throw bonus.
          Humans get a +2 saving throw bonus.)
1C8D 1C95 "gazes..."
1C96 1CA2 "reflects it!"
1CA3 1CAC "is Stoned"
1CAD 1E62 Petrifying gaze effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0179
          Effect ID: 83
          (If gaze is reflectable and target has anything with "Mirror" in its
          name equipped, gazing creature becomes target.  Target then must
          save vs. petrification or be turned to stone.)
1E63 1E6B "Gazes..."
1E6C 1E76 "is charmed"
1E77 2001 Charming gaze effect handler
          Stub: 0041:017E
          Effect ID: 84
          (Invokes the Charm Person spell handler, costing neither a spell slot
          nor an action, and with a -2 saving throw penalty.)
2002 20DE Determine class to drain (nested function of 2122)
          Return in AL: class to drain
          (The class to be drained is whichever one has the highest experience
          requirement were it reduced by one.  The new experience total is put
          in a stack variable of the enclosing scope.)
20DF 20E6 " levels"
20E7 20EE "a level"
20EF 20FA "is drained "
20FB 210A "is dead forever"
210B 2117 "max,cur,lost"
2118 2121 "is killed"
2122 23A3 Drain levels
          Parameter 1: Pointer to creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 levels to drain
          (Permanently kills creature if either animated, or a level is drained
          at 1 hit die.  Level lost is that requiring the highest experience,
          which is restorable.  Experience loss is to the minimum experience
          required to maintain levels after that; this is not fully restorable.
          Restorable maximum and current hit point loss is equal to current
          maximum HP divided by total number of levels; if this would reduce
          hit points to zero, the creature dies, but not permanently.  Base
          skills and statistics are recalculated afterwards.)
23A4 23C1 Melee drain 1 level effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0183
          Effect ID: 85
23C2 23DF Melee drain 2 levels effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0188
          Effect ID: 86
23E0 23EB "is Diseased"
23EC 248F Melee mummy rot attack effect handler
          Stub: 0041:018D
          Effect ID: 87
          (No effect if victim already has effect 50.  Otherwise, adds 14400
          minutes of effect 50 and 43200 minutes of effect 57.)
2490 24D8 Displaced effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0192
          Effect ID: 89
          (If combat round and attack roll are both 0, turns off upper 4 bits
          of effect strength.  If not, checks bit 16 of effect Strength: no
          effect if set, else it is set and attack roll is set to -1.)
24D9 2547 Constitution poison saving throw bonus effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0197
          Effect ID: 90
          (Adds to saving throw for Constitution 4...20.)
2548 2555 "is unaffected"
2556 25A1 Immunity to electricity and Magic Missile effect handler
          Stub: 0041:019C
          Effect ID: 91
          (Does not provide immunity to the Wand of Magic Missile.)
25A2 25BB Half damage from fire effect handler
          Stub: 0041:01A1
          Effect ID: 93
          (If resistance bitmask bit 1 set, divides damage by 2.)
25BC 2604 Half damage from blunt or piercing weapons effect handler
          Stub: 0041:01A6
          Effect ID: 94
          (If weapon type has either bit 1 or bit 128 set, divides damage by
          2, which can be to 0.)
2605 260F "Falls dead"
2610 264A Fighting on effect handler
          Stub: 0041:01AB
          Effect ID: 95
          (Sets effect removal flag trigger to False.  Creature then dies if it
          is in play.)
264B 2689 Immunity to weapons that are neither magical nor silver special
          effect handler
          Stub: 0041:01B0
          Effect ID: 96
          (If creature's weapon does not exist, or is neither magical nor
          silver, damage is reduced to 0.)
268A 26FF Constitution spell/wand saving throw bonus effect handler
          Stub: 0041:01B5
          Effect ID: 97
          (Adds to saving throw for Constitution 4...20.)
2700 272F Regenerate 3 hit points per round effect handler
          Stub: 0041:01BA
          Effect ID: 98
2730 27D8 Can fight on effect handler
          Stub: 0041:01BF
          Effect ID: 99
          (Adds 1d4+1 minutes of effect 95 if hit points reduced to -6...0.)
27D9 2813 Troll vulnerability to fire and acid effect handler
          Stub: 0041:01C4
          Effect ID: 100
          (Only works if all damage is fire or acid.  Adds 3d6 minutes of
          effect 102 if any other type of damage is inflicted.)
2814 2865 Troll add regeneration effect handler
          Stub: 0041:01C9
          Effect ID: 101
          (If lacking effects 59 and 98, adds effect 59 for 3 minutes.)
2866 28A4 Troll returning from going down effect handler
          Stub: 0041:01CE
          Effect ID: 102
          (Re-applies effect for 1 minute if revival triggers but failed.)
28A5 28BE "Turns gaseous and escapes"
28BF 2900 Gaseous form effect handler
          Stub: 0041:01D3
          Effect ID: 103
          (Gaseous form is equivalent to fleeing.)
2901 2914 Thri-kreen missile evasion effect handler
          Stub: 0041:01D8
          Effect ID: 104
          (Chance of evasion is 60%.)
2915 2975 Magic resistance
          Parameter: uint8 percent chance of spell success at level 11
2976 2983 Magic resistance 50% effect handler
          Stub: 0041:01DD
          Effect ID: 105
          (No monster has this.)
2984 2991 Magic resistance 85% effect handler
          Stub: 0041:01E2
          Effect ID: 106
          (Effectively 100% magic resistance versus cast spells and scrolls.)
2992 29B5 Elf resistance 90% to sleep and charm effect handler
          Stub: 0041:01E7
          Effect ID: 107
          (90% chance to prevent effects 11 and 53.)
29B6 29CA Immunity to sleep and charm effect handler
          Stub: 0041:01EC
          Effect ID: 108
          (100% chance to prevent effects 11 and 53.)
29CB 29D8 Immunity to paralysis effect handler
          Stub: 0041:01F1
          Effect ID: 109
          (100% chance to prevent effect 52.)
29D9 29EF Immunity to cold effect handler
          Stub: 0041:01F6
          Effect ID: 110
29F0 2A10 Immunity to paralysis and poison effect handler
          Stub: 0041:01FB
          Effect ID: 111
          (Immunity to Stinking Cloud, and 100% chance to prevent effects 52
          and 55.)
2A11 2A27 Immunity to fire effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0200
          Effect ID: 112
2A28 2A6C Efreeti fire resistance effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0205
          Effect ID: 113
          (-1 damage per damage die, minimum damage equal to dice.)
2A6D 2A86 Half damage from electricity effect handler
          Stub: 0041:020A
          Effect ID: 114
          (Damage is rounded down, which can be to 0.)
2A87 2AE5 Half damage from piercing or slashing weapons effect handler
          Stub: 0041:020F
          Effect ID: 115
          (If weapon type is 0 or has bit 1 set, divides damage by 2.)
2AE6 2B1F Half damage from magical weapons effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0214
          Effect ID: 116
          (If weapon has a +1 or higher bonus, divides damage by 2.)
2B20 2B62 Vulnerability to holy water effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0219
          Effect ID: 117
          (If item type is 85, inflicts 1d6 damage.)
2B63 2B7C Half damage from cold effect handler
          Stub: 0041:021E
          Effect ID: 118
2B7D 2BC7 Immunity to non-magical weapons effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0223
          Effect ID: 119
          (Weapons with a minus do count as magical.  Immunity only applies if
          attacker is of a PC race or has fewer than 3 HD.)
2BC8 2C10 Boulder evasion effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0228
          Effect ID: 120
          (50% chance of avoiding a weapon of type 87 or 88.)
2C11 2C1B "Spits Acid"
2C1C 2D37 Anhkheg acid squirt attack effect handler
          Stub: 0041:022D
          Effect ID: 121
          (Only actually triggers 25% of the time, and can only happen at range
          3 maximum.  Does 8d4 damage, save vs. breath weapon for half damage.
          There's nothing making this an actual acid attack.)
2D38 2D87 Mummy vulnerability to fire effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0232
          Effect ID: 122
          (Flasks of oil inflict 3d8 damage; magical *or* fire attacks do 1
          extra damage per die.)
2D88 2DE3 Immunity to weapons that are neither silver nor magical special
          effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0237
          Effect ID: 123
          (Magical weapons do full damage; else silver weapons do half damage;
          anything else does 0 damage.)
2DE4 2E07 Half-elf resistance 30% to sleep and charm effect handler
          Stub: 0041:023C
          Effect ID: 124
          (30% chance to prevent effects 11 and 53.)
2E08 2E36 Immunity to sleep, charm, paralysis, and poison effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0241
          Effect ID: 125
          (100% chance to prevent effects 11, 52, 53, and 55, plus immunity to
          Stinking Cloud.)
2E37 2ED9 Suppressible gaze attack effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0246
          Effect ID: 126
          (Cannot gaze at enemies equipping any item with "Mirror" in the name,
          or a Wooden Holy Symbol of Tyr.)
2EDA 2F4A Ready item effect handler
          Stub: 0041:024B
          Effect ID: 129, 133, 134, 136, 139
          (If item is unreadied, effect specified in item property 2 is removed
          from creature.  If item is readied, effect specified in item property
          2 is added to the creature, and the effect handler is called with
          that effect ID.)
2F4B 2F56 "is stronger"
2F57 30A4 Gauntlets of Ogre Power effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0250
          Effect ID: 131
30A5 311A Aligned weapon effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0255
          Effect ID: 132
          (If readying aligned weapon, weapon alignment in lower 4 bits of item
          property 2 must match character alignment, otherwise character takes
          damage in upper 4 bits of item property 2.)
311B 3133 "Must have Giant Strength"
3134 3179 Boulder effect handler
          Stub: 0041:025A
          Effect ID: 135
          (Boulders may not be equipped without at least Strength 19.)
317A 319A Spiritual Hammer effect handler
          Stub: 0041:025F
          Effect ID: 137
          (If Spiritual Hammer is unreadied, removes effect 23.)
319B 31A1 Empty function effect handler
          Stub: 0041:0264
          Effect ID: 5, 13, 19, 24, 27, 127, unimplemented effects (60/63/92)
          (Called for effects that don't require any specific handling.)
31A2 38A8 Initialize effect function pointer array
          Stub: 0041:0025
          (Defines a size 139 array at DS:682C, all pointing to a stub that
          jumps to a function in overlay 13 or 14.  The pointer for effect 88
          is defined elsewhere.)
38A9 38AD Empty function
          Stub: 0041:0020

Segment 2AA0 (IDA overlay 14): (GAME.OVR - add 127FB for offset)
Begin End
0000 0122 Combat round start creature setup
          Stub: 0068:0025
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          (* Set spell being cast to 0 (none).
           * Roll for and calculates initiative.
           * Set movement.)
0123 0190 Combat calculate creature movement
          Stub: 0068:002A
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL and DS:681A: uint8 movement times 2 (0...192)
          (Starts with current creature movement; adds GBVM $6E72 and the
          effects of haste, slow, and immobility.)
0191 0231 Combat calculate weapon damage
          Parameter 1: Pointer to attacking Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to defending Creature
          Parameter 3: uint8 (1 = primary attack, 2 = secondary attack)
          Return at DS:6818: uint8 damage
          (* Roll damage according to attacker's weapon and Strength.
           * Apply any backstab multiplier, if applicable.
           * Trigger effects of types 4 and 5.
           * Set element bitmask at DS:6819 to 0.)
0232 023D "-Backstabs-"
023E 024C "slays helpless"
024D 0254 "Attacks"
0255 0263 "(from behind) "
0264 0277 "with one cruel blow"
0278 0284 "Hitting for "
0285 028C " point "
028D 0295 " points "
0296 029F "of damage"
02A0 02AA "and Misses"
02AB 02B7 "lost a spell"
02B8 02C1 "goes down"
02C2 02CE "and is Dying"
02CF 02EE Set of status conditions that display message saying target is killed
02EF 02F8 "is killed"
02F9 0626 Combat process attack result
          Parameter 1: Pointer to attacking Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to defending Creature
          Parameter 3: uint8 attack type (0 = normal, 1 = from behind,
            2 = backstab, 3 = helpless)
          Parameter 4: uint8 damage inflicted
          Parameter 5: uint8 damage displayed
          Parameter 6: Boolean is hit
          (* Inflict damage, setting status conditions if appropriate.
           * Interrupt spellcasting if appropriate.
           * If defender reduced to 0 HP:
             * Remove all effects that disappear if that happens
             * Trigger reduced to 0 HP effects
             * Display icon and play sound effect for 0 HP
           * Print messages for the above appropriately.)
0627 0711 Combat check for creature moving next to guarding enemies
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
0712 08B1 Combat move creature
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 direction (0...7)
          (Call's responsibility to check that creature is not blocked or
          trying to flee.)
0C4F 0C57 "Got Away"
0C58 0C69 "Escape is blocked"
0C6A 0D22 Combat flee attempt
          Stub: 0068:0039
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: Boolean True
          (* Compare creature movement to highest enemy movement.
           * Determine success as described in Encumbrance and Movement.
             * If success, call 4208:0F06 put creature out of play as Running.
             * If failure, call 00BA:2637 end creature actions.)
0D23 0E51 Combat creature set current attacks times 2
          Stub: 0068:003E
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          (Takes into account weapon, combat round, slow/haste, and number of
          attacks already used.)
0E52 0E7A Combat adjusted attacks
          Paramter in AL: uint8 attacks times 2
          Return in AL: uint8 attacks adjusted for round number
          (Adds 1 every other round, then divides by 2.)
0E7B 0E81 "sweeps"
0E82 1084 Combat sweep attempt
          Stub: 0068:0043
          Parameter 1: Pointer to attacking Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to defending Creature
          Return in AL: Boolean if a sweep happened
1130 113F "turns undead..."
1140 1149 "is turned"
114A 1156 "Is destroyed"
1157 1169 "Nothing Happens..."
116A 1350 Combat turn undead
          Stub: 0068:004D
          Parameter: Pointer to turning cleric
          (As described in Turning Undead.)
1351 1405 Combat turn undead find target
          Stub: 0068:0052
          Parameter 1: Pointer to turning cleric
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Pointer to undead
          Return at Pointer: Pointer to target undead
          (Target undead is the lowest-level undead in line of sight; ties
          broken by lower distance.)
1406 17F5 Combat attack
          Parameter 1: Pointer to attacking Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to defending Creature
          Parameter 3: Boolean is from behind
          Parameter 4: Pointer to Pointer to Boolean creature done this round
          Return at Pointer: Boolean creature done this round
          (* If defender is helpless:
             * Play sound effect 7
             * Increment current number of attacks by 1
             * Automatically does enough damage to set defender HP to -5
             * Set all attacker remaining attacks to 0
             * Set attacker done this round
             * Remove attacker invisibility
           * If defender is not helpless:
             * Determine if Large weapon damage should be done; sets attacker
               damage if approrpriate
             * Trigger defender Armor Class effects
             * Determine whether attack is from behind; attack is considered
               from behind if either this check passes or caller says so
             * Determine whether attack is backstab
             * Apply any penalties for a ranged attack
             * Deduct 1 from attacker remaining attacks
             * Increment current number of attacks by 1
             * Remove attacker invisibility
             * Perform attack roll; if attack hits:
               * Play sound effect 7
               * Call 0191 calculate weapon damage
               * Call 02F9 process attack result
               * Trigger attacker weapon damage effects
             * Repeat until defender reduced to 0 HP, or attacker exhausts
               attacks remaining
             * If no attacks hit:
               * Play sound effect 9
               * Display message saying attacker missed
               * Set attacker done this round.)
1B1E 1BD7 Combat modify defense for distance
          Parameter 1: Pointer to attacking Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to defending Creature
          Parameter 3: Pointer to uint8 defender 60 minus AC
          Return in Pointer: modified defender 60 minus AC
          (No effect for any melee attack.  For a ranged attack, subrange is
          item range minus 1 then divided by 3.  Any attack more than 1
          subrange away adds 2 to defense; any attack more than 2 subranges
          away adds 3 to defense.)
1BD8 1BF7 Set of status conditions that are invalid for Cure Light Wounds
1BF8 1E15 Find target for Cure Light Wounds
          Stub: 0068:0061
          Parameter 1: Pointer to active Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Pointer to target Creature
          Return in AL: Boolean if any appropriate target found
          (Target creature must be no more than 1 tile away from active
          creature.  Checks all nine directions.
           * Searches for all conscious creatures who have less than maximum
             hit points and have the same hostility flag.  Active creature is
             itself highest priority if at less than half maximum hit points,
             else highest priority is whoever has the fewest hit points.
           * Also searches for unconscious creatures within range.  I don't see
             any logic stopping a hostile monster from healing an unconscious
             character.  Highest priority is whichever unconscious creature is
             checked last; the order is north, northeast, ..., northwest, same
             square.
           * Conscious characters are higher priority than unconscious ones
             if they have fewer than 7 hit points.)
20AD 20C2 "Already been targeted"
20C3 23F4 Combat cast spell target menu
          Stub: 0068:0066
          Parameter 1: uint8 spell ID
          Parameter 2: Boolean unknown
          Parameter 3: Pointer to Boolean spell cast flag
23F5 2404 "Camp Only Spell"
2405 2413 "Begins Casting"
2414 2573 Combat cast spell
          Stub: 0068:006B
          Parameter 1: uint8 spell ID (0 to ask player for spell)
          Parameter 2: unknown 8-bit
          Parameter 3: Pointer to Boolean spell cast flag
2574 263C Determine if weapon attack is backstab
          Parameter 1: Pointer to attacking Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to defending Creature
          Return in AL: Boolean
263D 26AF Determine direction from active creature to target creature
          Stub: 0068:007A
          Parameter 1: Pointer to active Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to target Creature
          Return in AL: uint8 direction (0...7)
          (Returns closest direction, not necessarily exact.  Returns 0 = north
          if active and target creature are the same.)
26B0 2878 Combat ranged weapon attack animation and sound
          Parameter 1: Pointer to attacking Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to defending Creature
          Parameter 3: Pointer to ranged weapon
2879 2907 Combat calculate hostile creature hit points percent remaining
          Stub: 0068:007F
          (Current hit points only count if hostile creature is in play;
          maximum hit points don't look at that.  The precise calculation is
          ((current total * 20) / maximum total) * 5.)
2908 2989 Combat calculate highest enemy movement
          Stub: 0068:0084
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: uint8 highest in play enemy movement
          (There is no check for line of sight.)
298A 2997 "Attack Ally: "
2998 2A68 Combat check for attack on ally
          Stub: 0068:0070
          Parameter 1: Pointer to attacking Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to defending Creature
          Return in AL: Boolean continue with attack
          (Asks player to confirm a physical attack on ally.  If confirmed:
           * Set GBVM $6E33 party attacked allies to 1.
           * Set hostility flag on any allied NPC.)
39C9 39D1 "Rakes..."
39D2 3A85 Rear claw rake effect handler
          Stub: 0068:008E
          Effect ID: 73
          (If two melee attacks have hit this round, adds two secondary melee
          attacks that do 2d4 damage and triggers them.)
3A86 3B78 Bite and hold process effect handler
          Stub: 0068:0093
          Effect ID: 74
          (Sets up a 3d4 primary melee attack for the next round.  Removes
          itself and effect 58 once that happens, or if either creature goes
          out of play.)
3B79 3B7E "STING"
3B7F 3B92 "The Gods intervene!"
3B93 3C6C Combat STING victory cheat
          Stub: 0068:0098
          Return in AL: Boolean victory cheat activated
3C6D 3C71 Empty function
          Stub: 0068:0020

Segment 2E68 (IDA overlay 15): (GAME.OVR - add 166CB for offset)
Begin End
0000 0108 Change barrier to impassable
          Parameter 1: int8 X-coordinate
          Parameter 2: int8 Y-coordinate
          Parameter 3: uint8 facing (0...7)
0109 0235 Change barrier to passable
          Parameter 1: int8 X-coordinate
          Parameter 2: int8 Y-coordinate
          Parameter 3: uint8 facing (0...7)
0236 0293 Does party have thief skill
          Parameter: uint8 thief skill index (0...7)
          Return in AL: Boolean
0294 04DE Bash door
          Return in AL: Boolean if door successfully bashed down
          (Checks Strength as described in Statistic: Strength.)
04DF 05AA Pick lock
          Return in AL: Boolean if lock successfully picked
          (Rolls against Open Locks skill for all Okay characters.)
05AB 05ED Find memorized spell
          Parameter 1: uint8 spell ID
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: uint8 spell book index (255 if not found)
05EE 0647 Find character with spell
          Parameter: uint8 spell ID:
          Return in DX:AX: Pointer to character (nil if not found)
          (Pointer is to the first character found.)
0648 068C Party casts Knock
          Return in AL: Boolean if Knock successfully cast
068D 073A Move forward command
          (* Resets GBVM $6DD5 to 0.
           * Returns if there is an impassable barrier in front of the party.
           * Determines new coordinates.
           * If a coordinate goes out of range, wraps coordinate then sets
             GBVM $6DD5 to 1.
           Does not actually move the party.)
073B 07F3 Move party forward on 3D map
07F4 0817 "The river's stench drives you back."
0818 0979 Move party in wilderness
097A 097A ""
097B 0983 "Not Here"
0984 0988 "ICON"
0989 0D4B Map main menu
          Stub: 0072:002A
          Return in AL: uint8 char code
          (Returns if:
           * in a 3D map, the player tries to move forward
           * in the Wilderness, the player tries to move in any direction
           * the "E"ncamp command is issued
           * the "L"ook command is issued
           Anything else is handled here.)
0D4C 0D50 "Bash"
0D51 0D56 " Pick"
0D57 0D5D " Knock"
0D5E 0D63 " Exit"
0D64 0D6C "Locked. "
0D6D 10A6 Resolve movement command
          Stub: 0072:0025
          (* Disallow movement if GBVM $6DC9 is 255.
           * If on a 3D map at a door, handle door menu.
           * Move party if possible.)
10A7 10AB Empty function
          Stub: 0072:0020

Segment 2F73 (IDA overlay 16): (GAME.OVR - add 17831 for offset)
Camp.
Begin End
0000 0158 Camp spell preparation time
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AX: uint16 minutes of total preparation time
          (Also sets base preparation time on character.)
0159 019B Reset spell memorization
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          (Unmarks all spells marked as to be memorized.)
019C 0213 Reset spell scribing
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          (Unmarks all scroll spells marked as to be scribed.)
0214 025B Reset party spell camp activities
          (Resets all spell memorization and scribing for the entire party.)
025C 0301 Count of spell slots remaining
          Parameter 1: int8 spell level (1...3)
          Parameter 2: int8 spell type (0...1)
          Return in AL: uint8 spell slots remaining
          (For current character, for specific level and type.)
0302 0321 "cannot cast spells in this area"
0322 0338 "is in no condition to "
0339 0348 "cast any spells"
0349 0358 "memorize spells"
0359 036B "scribe any scrolls"
036C 0488 Can current character perform spell activity
          Parameter: uint8 spell activity type (1 = casting, 2 = memorizing,
            3 = scribing)
          Return in AL: Boolean can perform spell activity
          (Casting is not possible in an anti-magic zone; everything is not
          possible if status is not Okay.  Prints error message if returning
          False.)
0489 04A0 "has no spells memorized"
04A1 056D Noncombat cast spell menu
          Stub: 0075:002A
077A 0823 Camp rest menu
          Parameter: Pointer to Boolean camp interrupted
0824 08BE Sort memorized spells
          (For current character.  The bit 128 memorization flag is ignored.)
08BF 08D6 "Memorize These Spells? "
08D7 08F1 "cannot memorize any spells"
08F2 0909 "Memorize these spells? "
090A 0AB8 Camp memorize menu
0AB9 0ACE "Scribe These Spells? "
0ACF 0AE6 "has no copyable scrolls"
0AE7 0B02 "You already know that spell"
0B03 0B25 "You are already scibing that spell"
0B26 0B44 "You can not scribe that spell."
0B45 0B5A "Scribe these spells? "
0B5B 0E36 Camp scribe menu
0E37 0EBB Add String to string linked list (nested procedure of 0FBC)
          Parameter 1: Boolean title flag
          Parameter 2: String
0EBE 0EBF " "
0EC0 0EC7 "Funky--"
0EC8 0EE8 "Studying Manual of Bodily Health"
0EE9 0F0E "Training with Manual of Bodily Health"
0F0F 0F1B "Feather Fall"
0F1C 0F24 "Helpless"
0F25 0F2B "Prayer"
0F2C 0F39 "Cause Disease"
0F3A 0F4F "Dreaded Mummy Disease"
0F50 0F58 "Repulsed"
0F59 0F61 "Poisoned"
0F62 0F6E "Regenerating"
0F6F 0F7E "Fire Resistance"
0F7F 0F88 "Invisible"
0F89 0F94 "Camouflaged"
0F95 0F9E "Displaced"
0F9F 0FB2 " <No Spell Effects>"
0FB3 0FBA "Display"
0FBB 0FBB ""
0FBC 13D0 Camp display menu
13F1 14A8 Camp magic menu
          Parameter: Pointer to Boolean camp interrupted
14A9 1600 Camp order menu move current character up
1601 171F Camp order menu move current character down
1720 173F (unknown Set)
1740 174D "Party Order: "
174E 176D (unknown Set)
176E 177F "has been selected"
1780 1876 Camp order menu
1877 1884 "quit TO DOS: "
1885 1891 "will be gone"
1892 18A3 "Drop from party? "
18A4 18B5 "bids you farewell"
18B6 18CA "is dumped in a ditch"
18CB 18E4 "Breathes A sigh of relief"
18E5 1A2F Camp drop menu
1A30 1A3D "Game Speed = "
1A3E 1A54 " (0=fastest 9=slowest)"
1A55 1A5C " Faster"
1A5D 1A64 " Slower"
1A65 1A6A " Exit"
1A6B 1A76 "Game Speed:"
1A77 1A96 (unknown Set)
1A97 1BEF Camp speed menu
1BF0 1C0F (unknown Set)
1C10 1C17 "Alter: "
1C18 1C25 "Monsters on  "
1C26 1C34 "Monsters off  "
1C35 1C43 "Portraits on  "
1C44 1C53 "Portraits off  "
1C54 1C58 "Exit"
1C59 1E22 Camp alter menu
1E23 1E3A "The party makes camp..."
1E3B 1E5A (unknown Set)
1E5B 1E61 "Camp: "
1E62 1E6E "Quit TO DOS "
1E6F 1FD8 Camp main menu
          Stub: 0075:0025
          Parameter: Pointer to Boolean camp interrupted
1FD9 1FDD Empty function
          Stub: 0075:0020

Segment 3171 (IDA overlay 17): (GAME.OVR - add 1997F for offset)
Main menu.
Begin End
0000 00E1 Free creature
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          (Any associated combat information, items, and effects is also
          freed.  Caller is expected to handle any Pointers to this Creature.)
00E2 00E2 ""
00E3 00F5 "Choose a function "
00F6 0115 Set of valid extended key codes.
0136 0142 "Quit to DOS "
0143 0148 "STING"
0149 0160 "I Understand, master..."
0161 04F0 Main menu
          Stub: 0078:0025
04F1 04FA "Pick Race"
04FB 04FD "  "
04FE 04FE ""
04FF 050A "Pick Gender"
050B 0515 "Pick Class"
0516 0524 "Pick Alignment"
0525 0544 Set of classes with cleric class
0545 055A "Keep this character? "
055B 056B "Character name: "
056C 1ED1 Create character menu
          (Leaks memory if aborted partway through character creation.)
1ED2 1ED7 "Drop "
1ED8 1EE2 " forever? "
1EE3 1EF1 "Are you sure? "
1EF2 1EFB "You dump "
1EFC 1F06 " out back."
1F07 1F1A " bids you farewell."
1F1B 1F36 " breathes a sigh of relief."
1F37 2032 Drop character menu
          (Character to be dropped is current one.  Asks for confirmation
          twice.)
206E 2081 " can't be modified."
2082 2094 "Modify character: "
2095 209E "Keep Exit"
209F 28ED Modify character menu
28EE 290C "we only train conscious people"
290D 2924 "Training costs 1000 gp."
2925 2943 "We don't train that class here"
2944 2959 "Not Enough Experience"
295A 2967 " will become:"
2968 2974 "    a level "
2975 2976 " "
2977 2983 "and a level "
2984 299A "Do you wish to train? "
299B 29AD "Congratulations..."
29AE 304E Training menu
          (Character must be carrying 1000 gold or equivalent to train.  If the
          character had any drained levels, acts as a Restoration spell that
          requires both experience and money.)
304F 3060 "Add a character: "
3061 3069 "Add Exit"
306A 306C "* "
306D 3290 Add character menu
3291 33D6 Remove creature
          Stub: 0078:002A
          Parameter 1: Boolean suppress party size decrement
          Parameter 2: Boolean free icon animation
          (Creature to be removed is current one.)
33D7 33D7 ""
33D8 33E6 "Head Body Keep"
33E7 34DE Customize portrait
          (For current character.)
37C8 37C8 ""
37C9 37CB "old"
37CD 37DB "ready   action"
37DC 37DF "new"
37E0 37E5 "Small"
37E6 37EB "Large"
37EC 37F0 "Hair"
37F1 37F5 "Face"
37F6 3815 (unknown Set)
3816 381A "ICON"
381B 382C "Is this icon ok? "
382D 3F30 Customize icon
          Stub: 0078:002F
          (Customizes current character.)
3F31 3FB2 Constitution bonus 1st level hit points for every class
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: int8 1st level hit points
          (Adds up Constitution hit point bonus for every class.  Calculation
          will be poorly behaved if not 3...18.  No division is performed.
          Called even when training, which results in multiple bonuses
          applied.)
4235 42EC Roll 1st level hit points for classes
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 class bitmask
          Return in AL: uint8 1st level hit point points
          (Rolls hit points for every requested class, with a minimum of 2/3 of
          the number of sides on the die, then returns the sum.  No division is
          performed.  Also called for later levels, which won't work for
          unimplemented classes with 2 hit dice at 1st level, but works fine
          for the basic four classes.)
42ED 4453 Take coins in gold value from creature
          Parameter 1: int32 treasure value in gold
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Creature
4454 4458 Empty function
          Stub: 0078:0020

Segment 35B7 (IDA overlay 18): (GAME.OVR - add 1DFE6 for offset)
Save file.
Begin End
0000 000C "charlist.txt"
000D 000F "* "
0010 0196 Load charlist.txt
          Stub: 007C:0025
          Parameter: Pointer to Pointer to String linked list
          Return in Pointer: Pointer to charlist.txt String linked list
          (Character names are prepended with "* " if currently in the party.)
0197 01A3 "charlist.txt"
01A4 01B5 "Put save disk in "
01B6 01B7 ":"
01B8 0299 Save charlist.txt
          Stub: 007C:002A
          Parameter: Pointer to String linked list
          (Ignores Strings beginning with "*", which are characters currently
          in the party.)
029A 02AB "Put save disk in "
02AC 02AD ":"
02AE 032E Check save directory
          (Asks user to insert save disk if needed.)
0476 047B "CHEAD"
047C 0481 "CBODY"
0482 0673 Load character icon animation
          Stub: 007C:002F
          Parameter: Boolean loading character flag
          (Assumes character is current creature.)
0674 0678 ".cha"
0679 067A "."
067B 067F ".sav"
0680 0691 "Put save disk in "
0692 0693 ":"
0694 0698 ".itm"
0699 069D ".spc"
069E 0AC3 Save character
          Stub: 007C:0034
          Parameter 1: Pointer to character
          Parameter 2: Pointer to file name String (without extension)
          (* Step 1:
             * If writing a single character, update CHARLIST.TXT and construct
               filename using sanitized character name.
             * If writing for a saved game, use supplied file name.
           * Step 2: destination file is file name + ".cha" or ".str"
             The file is deleted if it exists; then the full 285-byte character
             record is written as-is; no pointers are removed.
           * Step 3: destination file is file name + ".itm"
             The file is deleted if it exists; then all 63-byte item records
             are written as-is, one after another; no pointers are removed.
             If there are no items, the file won't exist.
           * Step 4: destination file is file name + ".spc"
             The file is deleted if it exists; then all 9-byte effect records
             are written as-is, one after another; no pointers are removed.
             If there are no effects, the file won't exist.)
0AC4 0AD5 "Put save disk in "
0AD6 0AD7 ":"
0AD8 0ADC ".sav"
0ADD 0AE1 ".cha"
0AE2 0AE6 ".itm"
0AE7 0AEB ".spc"
0AEC 0E97 Load character
          Stub: 007C:0039
          Parameter 1: Pointer to character name String
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 3: Boolean saved game flag (".cha"/".sav")
          Parameter 4: Boolean ask for save disk
          Return at Pointer to Creature: loaded character
          (Character name is converted to a valid filename.  Loaded character
          is placed at pointer.  Loads and sets pointers for items and effects
          as well.)
0E98 0E9B "MON"
0E9C 0E9F "CHA"
0EA0 0EA4 "*.dax"
0EA5 0EBB "Unable to load monster"
0EBC 0EBF "SPC"
0EC0 0EC3 "ITEM"
0EC4 1261 Load creature data, effects, and items from disk
          Stub: 007C:003E
          Parameter 1: uint8 creature ID
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Creature
          Return at Pointer: Creature
          (Loads creature data, effects, and items; effects and items are
          converted to linked lists here.  Makes calls to RNG in an apparent
          abandoned attempt to randomize creature coloring.)
1262 1425 Add creature to party
          Stub: 007C:0043
          Parameter: uint8 creature ID
          (Randomizes portrait body and head according to class and gender.)
1426 1445 Set of valid character icon animation indices
1446 157E Add character to party
          Stub: 007C:0052
          Parameter: Pointer to character
          (* Character placed at end of creature list and becomes current
             creature.
           * Assign icon animation index.
           * Increment party size at GBVM $6E3E.)
157F 1585 "savgam"
1586 158A ".dat"
158B 158D " "
158D 159E "Load Which Game: "
159F 15BE Set of valid save letters
15BF 15D0 "Put save disk in "
15D1 15E6 "Loading...Please Wait"
15E7 15E8 "."
15E9 15ED ".sav"
15EE 15F2 ".cha"
15F3 15F7 ".itm"
15F8 15FC ".spc"
15FD 1601 "ICON"
1602 1CC4 Load game
          Stub: 007C:0048
          (* Find which save files exist.
           * Ask player for save letter; aborts if not valid.
           * Reverse save game procedure of 1D58.
           * Delete individual character save files, if they exist.
           * Load character icon animation.
           * Special handling for Yarash's Pyramid.)
1CC5 1CD6 "Save Which Game: "
1CD7 1CEA "A B C D E F G H I J"
1CEB 1D0A Set of valid save letters
1D0B 1D11 "savgam"
1D12 1D16 ".dat"
1D17 1D28 "Put save disk in "
1D29 1D2A ":"
1D2B 1D3F "Saving...Please Wait"
1D40 1D46 "CHRDAT"
1D47 1D48 "."
1D49 1D4D *.cha"
1D4E 1D52 ".itm"
1D53 1D57 ".spc"
1D58 22B6 Save game
          Stub: 007C:004D
          (* Ask player for save letter; aborts if not valid.
           * Save game data to SAVGAM?.DAT, as in Save File Format.
           * Call 069E to save each character.
           * Delete individual character save files, if they exist.)
22B7 22D3 "Save and exit  Insert disk #"
22D4 22D4 ""
22D5 23DF Does file exist, save and quit to DOS if not
          Parameter: Pointer to filename
          Stub: 007C:0057
23E0 23E4 Empty function
          Stub: 007C:0020

Segment 37F6 (IDA overlay 19): (GAME.OVR - add 2069D for offset)
Quest complete graphics.
Begin End
0114 0137 "Mortally wounded, the dragon roars!"
0138 015C "The spirit of Tyranthraxus flares up"
015D 0174 "from the dragon's body."
0175 017A "FINAL"
017B 019E ""Fools, you have but slain the body"
019F 01C3 "I possessed.  I cannot be defeated!""
01C4 01EB "With the power of the pool of radiance"
01EC 020A "which I moved here, to my lair,"
020B 022F "I will still rule, by possessing one"
0230 0238 "of you!""
0239 025F ""No Lord Bane!  I can still rule here!"
0260 0287 "I have not failed.  Do not call me back"
0288 029A "through the pool!""
029B 02A3 "Noooo..."
02A4 06B2 Win game
          Stub: 0082:0025
          (Called if PROGRAM 8 executes.)
06B3 08F5 Yarash's Pyramid complete
          Stub: 0082:002A
          Parameter: Boolean unknown
          (Called if Yarash's Pyramid is complete but the party has not yet
          been rewarded for it.)
08F6 08FA Empty function
          Stub: 0082:0020

Segment 3886 (IDA overlay 20): (GAME.OVR - add 2103A to offset)
Character menu.
Begin End
0000 0005 "(NPC)"
0006 000A "Age "
000B 000F "STR "
0010 0014 "INT "
0015 0019 "WIS "
001A 001E "DEX "
001F 0023 "CON "
0024 0028 "CHA "
0029 002E "Level "
002F 0030 "/"
0031 0035 "Exp "
0036 003C "Weapon"
003D 0042 "Armor"
0043 0049 "Status"
004A 050C Display character
          Stub: 0085:0025
          (Uses the current creature.  Displays name, NPC status, sex, race,
          age, alignment, classes, stats, money, levels, Armor Class, hit
          points, THAC0, weapon damage, encumbrance, movement, weapon damage,
          equipped weapon and armor, and status.  If the portraits setting is
          on and the disk number is 3, also displays the character portrait.
          Does not handle anything interactive.)
050D 05BD Print character money
          Stub: 0085:0034
          (Uses the current creature.  The screen locations for the prints are
          hardcoded here.  Displays both the money type name and how much of
          it, but only for nonzero values.)
05BE 05C4 "AC    "
05C5 05CB "HP    "
05CC 05D4 "THAC0   "
05D5 05D6 "d"
05D7 05D8 "+"
05D9 05DA "-"
05DB 05E9 "Damage        "
05EA 05FB "Encumbrance      "
05FC 0607 "Movement   "
0608 08F7 Print character combat stats
          Stub: 0085:002A
          (Uses the current creature.  The screen location for the prints are
          hardcoded here.  Displays current Armor Class, hit points, THAC0,
          weapon damage, encumbrance, and movement.  The correction for Haste
          and Slow effects are both applied in the wrong direction.)
08F8 08F9 "0"
08FA 08FC "00"
08FD 08FE "("
08FF 0900 ")"
0901 0A4B Print character stat
          Stub: 0085:002F
          Parameter 1: int8 stat index (0...5)
          Parameter 2: Boolean modifying flag
          (Uses the current creature.  The screen location for the print is
          hardcoded here.  The color used is bright green normally, hot pink if
          Modifying a character.)
04AC 0A6B Set of keys that exit from the view character menu
0A6C 0A72 "Items "
0A73 0A7A "Spells "
0A7B 0A81 "Trade "
0A82 0A87 "Drop "
0A88 0A8C "Exit"
0A8D 0A92 "View:"
0AB3 0D1F View character
          Parameter: Pointer to Boolean done this round flag
0D20 0D31 "Must be unreadied"
0D32 0D57 " was going to scribe from that scroll"
0D58 0D6F "is it Okay to lose it? "
0D70 0E62 Check inventory item availability
          Parameter: Pointer to Item
          Return in AL: Boolean
          (An inventory item is not available if it is equipped, or a scroll
          currently being scribed from; the user may cancel the latter and make
          the item available.)
0E63 0E82 (unknown Set)
0E83 0E88 "Ready"
0E89 0E8D " Use"
0E8E 8E94 " Drop"
0E95 0E9A " Drop"
0E9B 0EA1 " Halve"
0EA2 0EA7 " Join"
0EA8 0EAD " Sell"
0EAE 0EB1 " Id"
0EB2 0EB7 "Items"
0EB8 0EC2 "Ready Item"
0EC3 0ED2 "Must be Readied"
0ED3 0ED8 "Your "
0ED9 0EED "will be gone forever"
0EEE 0EF7 "Drop It? "
0EF8 1493 Items menu (includes selling/ID in shop)
          Parameter: Pointer to done this round flag
1494 149F "It's Cursed"
14A0 14AB "Wrong Class"
14AC 14BA "already using "
14BB 14CF "Your hands are full!"
14D0 1717 Ready/unready item in inventory
          Stub: 0085:0043
          Parameter: Pointer to Item
          (Uses the current creature.  If currently readied, unreadies item
          unless it is cursed.  If currently unreadied, equips it if possible.
          An error message is usually displayed if the action fails.  Calls
          effect handler, but any normal effects are handled by the recalculate
          creature statistics procedure.)
1718 1728 "Trade with Whom?"
1729 1733 "Overloaded"
1734 17DB Item trade menu
          Parameter: Pointer to Item
17DC 17EC "Can't halve that"
17ED 189C Halve item
          Parameter: Pointer to Item
189D 1A76 Join item
          Parameter: Pointer to Item
1A77 1A83 "uses an item"
1A84 1A89 "Item:"
1A8A 1C8A Use item
          Stub: 0085:0048
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Item
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Boolean done this round
1C8B 1C99 "I'll give you "
1C9A 1CB0 " gold pieces for your "
1CB1 1CBF "Is It a Deal? "
1CC0 1CC5 "Sold!"
1CC6 1CED "Overloaded.  Money will be put in pool."
1CEE 1EC7 Sell item
          Parameter: Pointer to Item
1EC8 1EEF "For 200 gold pieces I'll identify your "
1EF0 1EFE "Is It a Deal? "
1EFF 1F0F "Not Enough Money"
1F10 1F35 "I can't tell anything new about your "
1F36 1F51 "It looks like some sort of "
1F52 2119 Identify item
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Item
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Boolean new information learned
211A 2123 "Trade to?"
2124 2125 " "
2126 2139 "Select type of coin"
213A 213A ""
213B 2144 "How much "
2145 2155 "will you trade? "
2156 2475 Trade treasure menu
          (Submenu of view character menu.)
2476 2477 " "
2478 248B "Select type of coin"
248D 2496 "How much "
2497 24A6 "will you drop? "
24A7 275A Drop money menu
          (Submenu of view character menu.)
275B 27DE Check if creature cannot carry item
          Stub: 0085:004D
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Item
          Return in AL: Boolean
          (Item count limit and weight allowance are both checked.)
27DF 28BD Select previous or next character
          Stub: 0085:0052
          Parameter: uint8 extended scan code ("G" or "O")
28BE 2938 Creature coin value in gold
          Stub: 0085:0057
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in DX:AX: int32 coin value in gold
          (The result is rounded up to the nearest gold piece.  Only coins
          count; gems and jewelry are not included.)
2939 2942 "in Memory"
2943 2950 "in Spell Book"
2951 295A "on Scroll"
295B 2965 "on Scrolls"
2966 2974 "to choose from"
2975 2984 "to be memorized"
2985 2992 "to be scribed"
2993 2993 ""
2994 299B "Spells "
299C 2B0C Spell menu
          Stub: 0085:005C
          Parameter 1: uint8 spell menu type (0 = memorized, 1 = in spell book,
            2 = on scroll, 3 = on scrolls, 4 = selection when gaining level,
            5 = to be memorized, 6 = to be scribed)
          Parameter 2: uint8 spell selection type (1 = cast, 2 = memorize,
            3 = scribe, 4 = learn)
          Parameter 3: Pointer to int16 spell selection index
          Parameter 4: Pointer to Boolean spell list is not empty
          Return in AL: uint8 spell ID
          Return at Pointer to int16: int16 spell index
2B0D 2B11 Empty function
          Stub: 0085:0020

Segment 3B38 (IDA overlay 21): (GAME.OVR - add 23DCC for offset)
Camp helpers.
Begin End
0000 02F1 Time out effects
          Parameter 1: uint8 time count
          Parameter 2: uint8 time unit (1 = minute, 2 = turn, 3 = hour,
            4 = day, 5 = month; 0 = segment and 6 = year are recognized but
            are never used and will not work)
          (Times out effects by the specific duration.  Any effects that are
          triggered by being removed will still trigger normally.  Any
          dependency on precise timing will not work, steps can be by as much
          as 10 minutes.  The logic here is strange-looking but I've never seen
          problems in practice.)
02F2 03A2 Validate GBVM clock
          Parameter: Pointer to GBVM clock component array
          (* Fixes array so no component exceeds its limit; e.g. if the array
             has 65 minutes, that changes to 5 minutes and 1 hour is added.
           * Ages your characters, but only after 256 years have elapsed
             because of a bug.)
03A3 03D4 Validate rest time array
          (Calls 02F2, then caps the rest time at 99 hours.)
03D5 0479 Advance clock
          Stub: 008C:0025
          Parameter 1: uint8 time count
          Parameter 2: int8 time unit (0 = segment, 1 = minute, 2 = turn,
            3 = hour, 4 = day, 5 = month, 6 = year)
          (Advances the game clock by the specified duration.  Effects expire
          appropriately.)
047A 0562 Decrement rest time
          Parameter 1: uint8 time count
          Parameter 2: int8 time unit (0 = segment, 1 = minute, 2 = turn,
            3 = hour, 4 = day, 5 = month, 6 = year)
0563 0564 "0"
0565 05E2 Convert 2-digit uint8 to String, pad with 0
          Parameter 1: Pointer to String
          Parameter 2: uint8 value
          Return in Pointer: 0-padded String
05E3 05ED "Rest Time:"
05EE 05EF ":"
05F0 06D7 Display rest time
          Parameter: int8 time unit (unknown, not same as other functions)
06D8 06D8 ""
06D9 0700 "Rest   daYs Hours Mins   Inc Dec   Exit"
0701 0720 (unknown Set)
0721 0856 Camp rest time menu
          Return in AL: Boolean start rest flag
          (Modifies array at DS:6DC2.)
0857 0870 "The Whole Party Is Healed"
0871 0916 Check for resting daily heal
          (Restores 1 hit point to the whole party every 24 hours in camp.)
0917 0924 "has memorized"
0925 09DA Check for character spell memorizing complete
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Boolean spell preparation complete
          Return in Pointer to Boolean: if spell preparation complete
          Return in AL: uint8 spell ID of next spell to scribe (0 if none)
09DB 09E6 "has scribed"
09E7 0B09 Check for character spell scribing complete
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Boolean spell preparation complete
          Return in Pointer to Boolean: if spell preparation complete
          Return in AL: uint8 level of next spell to memorize (0 if none)
0B0A 0BB1 Advance party spell preparation
          (Adjusts spell preparation time; calls 0925 and 09E7 to memorize and
          scribe spells.)
0BB2 0C69 Advance party spell preparation base time
          Parameter: Pointer to uint8 hour tick timer
          (Times out hours required before spells can be memorized and scribed
          in earnest.)
0C6A 0C78 "Stop Resting? "
0C79 0C99 "The Party is rudely interrupted!"
0C9A 0E5F Camp rest
          Stub: 008C:002A
          Return in AL: Boolean rest interrupted
          (If rest timer is not zero:
           * Decrement rest time by 1 tick.
           * Advance clock by 5 minutes.
           * Call 0871 heal party by 1 hit point every 24 hours.
           * Call 0B0A advance party spell preparation.
           * Check if the party can be interrupted at GBVM $6DD2; if it can be,
             roll percentile dice to check for chance of interruption at GBVM
             $6DD3 and return if it happens.
           Resting can be stopped by pressing a key.)
0E60 0E64 Empty function
          Stub: 008C:0020

Segment 3C1F (IDA overlay 22): (GAME.OVR - add 24C89 for offset)
Items and money.
Begin End
0000 001F Character carrying capacity (weight allowance + 1500)
          Parameter: Pointer to character
          Return in AX: int16 carrying capacity
0020 0039 Remove weight from character
          Parameter 1: Pointer to character
          Parameter 2: uint16 weight to remove from character
003A 0053 Add weight to character
          Parameter 1: Pointer to character
          Parameter 2: uint16 weight to add to character
0054 00A7 Check if character will be overloaded
          Stub: 008F:0025
          Parameter 1: Pointer to character
          Parameter 2: uint16 weight to be additionally carried
          Parameter 3: Pointer to uint16 with takable weight if overloaded
          Return in AL: Boolean character will be overloaded
00A8 012F Coin value in gold
          Stub: 008F:005C
          Parameter: Pointer to int32 array of money
          Return in DX:AX: int32 money value in gold
          (The result is rounded up to the nearest gold piece.  Only coins
          count; gems and jewelry are not included.  In practice, the parameter
          always points to treasure money; creatures always have money arrays
          too, except those are uint16 arrays.)
0130 0184 Set creature coins in gold
          Stub: 008F:0052
          Parameter: uint16 gold coins
          (Sets creature coins to platinum and gold coins equal in value to
          parameter.  Electrum, silver, and copper are reset to 0; gems and
          jewelry remain unchanged.)
0185 01DA Set treasure coins in gold
          Stub: 008F:0057
          Parameter: uint16 gold coins
          (Sets treasure coins to platinum and gold coins equal in value to
          parameter.  Electrum, silver, and copper are reset to 0; gems and
          jewelry remain unchanged.)
01DB 0202 "Overloaded.  Money will be put in Pool."
0203 0293 Give platinum to current creature (with capacity check)
          Parameter: uint16 platinum
0294 0440 Input number with maximum
          Stub: 008F:003E
          Parameter 1: uint16 maximum
          Parameter 2: Pointer to query String
          Parameter 3: uint8 query color (0...15)
          Return in AX: uint16 input (0 if Escape is pressed)
          (Query string and input are on bottom line.  The only recognized keys
          are 0...9, Backspace, Return, and Escape.  Any number greater than
          the maximum immediately is set to the maximum.)
0441 044B "Overloaded"
044C 0507 Trade money
          Stub: 008F:0043
          Parameter 1: Pointer to creature giving money
          Parameter 2: Pointer to creature receiving money
          Parameter 3: uint16 quantity of money to trade
          Parameter 4: int8 type of money (0...6)
          (If receiving creature cannot carry the money, does nothing; else
          money is removed from giving creature and added to receiving
          creature, with encumbrance adjusted appropriately.)
0508 05DF Pool money
          Stub: 008F:002A
          (PCs put all money they have in the pool, but not NPCs of status
          other than 179.)
05E0 0639 Count characters that can pool money
          Return in AL: uint8 count
          (PCs and anyone with NPC status 179.)
063A 0A00 Share money
          Stub: 008F:002F
          (Only among PCs.  Money is shared as evenly as possible; stronger
          characters pick up anything that can't be shared, with more valuable
          money taken first.)
0A01 0A7C Drop money
          Stub: 008F:0048
          Parameter 1: Pointer to character
          Parameter 2: uint16 quantity of money to drop
          Parameter 3: int8 type of money (0...6 for copper...jewelry)
          (The money goes to the money pool if you are in a shop or temple, or
          if you are in the loot menu; it otherwise disappears forever.)
0A7D 0A87 "Overloaded"
0A88 0B59 Take money
          Parameter 1: Pointer to character
          Parameter 2: uint16 quantity of money to take
          Parameter 3: int8 type of money (0...6 for copper...jewelry)
          (Only takes as much as the character can carry.)
0B5A 0B5F "Gems "
0B60 0B65 "Gold "
0B66 0B6F "Platinum "
0B70 0B79 "electrum "
0B7A 0B81 "silver "
0B82 0B89 "Copper "
0B8A 0B92 "Jewelry "
0B93 0CB9 Parse String with money type
          Stub: 008F:0039
          Parameter 1: Pointer to parsed String
          Parameter 2: Pointer to returned String
          Return in AL: int8 money type (0...6 for copper...jewelry)
          Return in Pointer: String money type + " "
          (Leading spaces are skipped.)
0CBA 0CBA ""
0CBB 0CBC " "
0CBD 0CD0 "Select type of coin"
0CD1 0CDA "How much "
0CDB 0CEA "will you take? "
0CEB 0F7D Take money menu
          Stub: 008F:0034
0F7E 0FD1 Determine if there is treasure
          Stub: 008F:004D
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Boolean money
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Boolean items
          (Sets both Booleans according to treasure global variables.)
0FD2 100F Generate random bonus for random weapon or armor
          Return in AL: int8 1 (70%), 2 (25%), or 3 (5%)
1010 18DF Generate random item
          Stub: 008F:0061
          Parameter 1: uint8 item type
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Item
          Return at Pointer: random item
18E0 18F2 "No Gems or Jewelry"
18F3 18F7 " Gem"
18F8 18FD " Gems"
18FE 1909 " piece of Jewelry"
1910 1922 " pieces of Jewelry"
1923 1941 "You have a fine collection of:"
1942 1948 "  Gems"
1949 1952 "  Jewelry"
1953 1958 " Exit"
1959 1964 "Appraise : "
1965 197A "The Gem is Valued at "
197B 197F " gp."
1980 1984 "Sell"
1985 198E "Sell Keep"
198F 1999 "You can : "
199A 19B1 "The Jewel is Valued at "
19B2 2255 Appraise menu
          Stub: 008F:0066
          Parameter: Pointer to Boolean anything to appraise flag
          Return at Boolean: False if character has no gems or jewelry
2256 225A Empty function
          Stub: 008F:0020

Segment 3E45 (IDA overlay 23): (GAME.OVR - add 27018 for offset)
Spell.  Many of these are invoked via the function pointer array at DS:6B84,
which has 68 entries, and which is invoked from 0C20.  Spell function pointers
(aside from the special index 0 function) have no arguments and return nothing,
and depend on global variables for what normally would be arguments.  The
current creature is always the caster.
Begin End
0000 0004 "Cast"
0005 000D "Memorize"
000E 0014 "Scribe"
0015 001A "Learn"
001B 003A unknown Set
003B 0049 "Choose Spell: "
004A 0069 unknown Set
006A 0089 unknown Set
008A 0286 Spell selection
          Stub: 0096:0025
          Parameter 1: uint8 spell selection type (1 = cast, 2 = memorize,
            3 = scribe, 4 = learn)
          Parameter 2: Pointer to int16 spell selection index
          Return in AL: uint8 spell ID (0 for none)
0287 0289 " *"
028A 028C "  "
028D 044D Add spell to spell list
          Parameter: uint8 spell ID (bit 128 set to mark spell)
          (Adds entries to both linked list at DS:4766 and array at DS:476A.)
044E 051B Add scroll spells to spell list
          Parameter: Boolean spell list is for scribing
          (Spells are from current scroll.  Also adds scrolls to spell scroll
          array.)
051C 095B Add from all scrolls to spell list
          Parameter: Boolean spell list is for scribing
          (Spells are from all scrolls of the current character.  Sets spell
          scroll array to all added scrolls.)
059C 0728 Generate spell list
          Stub: 0096:002A
          Parameter: uint8 spell menu type (0 = memorized, 1 = in spell book,
            2 = on scroll, 3 = on scrolls, 4 = selection when gaining level,
            5 = to be memorized, 6 = to be scribed)
          Return in AL: Boolean spell list is not empty
0729 07D5 Calculate spell range
          Stub: 0096:002F
          Parameter: uint8 spell ID
          Return in AL: uint8 range (minimum 1; 255 if an attack roll is
            needed)
          (For current creature.)
07D6 08C2 Calculate spell duration
          Parameter: uint8 spell ID
          Return in AX: uint16 duration
          (Handles logic for the special cases of spell ID 40, 57, 59, 63, or
          67; defaults to spell table otherwise.)
08C3 0A7D Resolve spell
          Parameter 1: uint8 spell ID
          Parameter 2: uint8 spell effectiveness (0 = use default caster level;
            bit 128 can be hostility flag)
          Parameter 3: Boolean does effect removal call handler
          Parameter 4: uint8 damage
          Parameter 5: uint8 element bitmask
          Parameter 6: Pointer to String
          (Current creature is the caster; target creatures must be defined in
          global variables.  For each target creature:
           * Roll for saving throw and attack, as needed.  Spells requiring an
             attack roll trigger target creature Armor Class effects.
           * Apply saving throw success result to damage.
           * Apply any caused effect to target creature.
           * Reset DS:6819 element bitmask to 0.)
0A7E 0A90 "Cast Spell on whom"
0A91 0BAD Noncombat cast spell target menu
          Stub: 0096:0034
          Parameter 1: uint8 spell ID
          Parameter 2: Boolean unknown
          Parameter 3: Pointer to Boolean spell cast flag
0BAE 0BC7 "is a combat-only spell..."
0BC8 0BD1 "Lose it? "
0BD2 0BDB "That Item"
0BDC 0BF4 "is a combat-only item..."
0BF5 0BFD "Use it?"
0BFE 0C03 "casts"
0C04 0C11 "Abort Spell? "
0C12 0C1F "Spell Aborted"
0C20 0F4E Cast spell
          Stub: 0096:0039
          Parameter 1: uint8 spell ID
          Parameter 2: Boolean unknown
          Parameter 3: Boolean AI flag
          Parameter 4: Pointer to Boolean target selected
          (* If combat spell cast out of combat, ask for confirmation.
           * If manually controlled character, call 2AA0:20C3 target menu.  Set
             Pointer when done.
           * Handle request to abort spell if a target is not supplied.
           * If in combat, play sound effect:
             * 11 for Fireball
             * 8 for Lightning Bolt
             * 2 for any other spell
           * If in combat, animate spell.
           * Remove invisibility from caster.
           * If not from item, remove spell from caster spells known.
           * Call into DS:6B84 spell function pointer array.)
0F4F 1003 Cast spell targeting only one side
          Parameter 1: Boolean hostility flag
          Parameter 2: Pointer to String
1004 100E "is Blessed"
100F 1035 Bless spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0057
          Spell ID: 1
          (Calls 0F4F.)
1036 103F "is Cursed"
1040 106A Curse spell handler
          Stub: 0096:005C
          Spell ID: 2
          (Calls 0F4F.)
106B 10A5 Cure Light Wounds spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0061
          Spell ID: 3
10A6 10A6 ""
10A7 10DC Cause Light Wounds spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0066
          Spell ID: 4
10DD 10E8 "is affected"
10E9 1115 Detection spell handler
          Stub: 0096:006B
          Spell ID: 5, 11, 18, 22, 29
1116 1122 "is protected"
1123 114F Protection spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0070
          Spell ID: 6, 7, 16, 17, 52, 53, 54
1150 1161 "is cold-resistant"
1162 118E Resist Cold spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0075
          Spell ID: 8
118F 118F ""
1190 11C3 Burning Hands spell handler
          Stub: 0096:007A
          Spell ID: 9
11C4 11D1 "is unaffected"
11D2 11DC "is charmed"
11DD 1298 Charm Person spell handler
          Stub: 0096:007F
          Spell ID: 10
          (Only works on humanoid-type monsters that are not Large in either
          sense.)
1299 12A4 "is stronger"
12A5 135C Enlarge spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0084
          Spell ID: 12
135D 136D "has been reduced"
136E 13CB Reduce spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0089
          Spell ID: 13
13CC 13D7 "is friendly"
13D8 1437 Friends spell handler
          Stub: 0096:008E
          Spell ID: 14
1438 1438 ""
1439 148C Magic Missile spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0093
          Spell ID: 15
148D 1498 "is shielded"
1499 14C5 Shield spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0098
          Spell ID: 19
14C6 14C6 ""
14C7 150D Shocking Grasp spell handler
          Stub: 0096:009D
          Spell ID: 20
150E 151A "falls asleep"
151B 164F Sleep spell handler
          Stub: 0096:00A2
          Spell ID: 21
1650 1657 "is held"
1658 17D6 Hold Person spell handler
          Stub: 0096:00A7
          Spell ID: 23, 49
17D7 17E8 "is fire resistant"
17E9 1815 Resist Fire spell handler
          Stub: 0096:00AC
          Spell ID: 24
1816 1821 "is silenced"
1822 184E Silence 15' Radius spell handler
          Stub: 0096:00B1
          Spell ID: 25
184F 185A "is affected"
185B 1903 Slow Poison spell handler
          Stub: 0096:00B6
          Spell ID: 26
1904 190E "is charmed"
190F 19C1 Snake Charm spell handler
          Stub: 0096:00BB
          Spell ID: 27
19C2 19C2 ""
19C3 1A08 Spiritual Hammer spell handler
          Stub: 0096:00C0
          Spell ID: 28
1A09 1A15 "is invisible"
1A16 1A42 Invisibility spell handler
          Stub: 0096:00C5
          Spell ID: 30, 50
1A43 1A4E "Knock-Knock"
1A4F 1A7B Knock spell handler
          Stub: 0096:00CA
          Spell ID: 31
1A7C 1A89 "is duplicated"
1A8A 1ABF Mirror Image spell handler
          Stub: 0096:00CF
          Spell ID: 32
1AC0 1ACB "is weakened"
1ACC 1AF8 Ray of Enfeeblement spell handler
          Stub: 0096:00D4
          Spell ID: 33
1AF9 1B10 "Creates a noxious cloud"
1B11 1F34 Stinking Cloud spell handler
          Stub: 0096:00D9
          Spell ID: 34
1F35 1F40 "is stronger"
1F41 2062 Strength spell handler
          Stub: 0096:00DE
          Spell ID: 35
2063 206E "is animated"
206F 220E Animate Dead spell handler
          Stub: 0096:00E3
          Spell ID: 36
          (Effect strength is caster level,with bit 16 set to caster
          hostility flag.)
220F 2216 "can see"
2217 2253 Cure Blindness spell handler
          Stub: 0096:00E8
          Spell ID: 37
          (Removes effect 33; prints message if that happened.)
2254 225C "is blind"
225D 2289 Cause Blindness spell handler
          Stub: 0096:00ED
          Spell ID: 38
228A 232E Remove disease and associated effects
          Return in AL: Boolean if effects 34, 43, or 50 were removed
          (Removes effects 34, 43, 44, 50, and 57.)
232F 233F Cure Disease spell handler
          Stub: 0096:00F2
          Spell ID: 39
2340 234B "is diseased"
234C 2378 Cause Disease spell handler
          Stub: 0096:00F7
          Spell ID: 40
2379 2384 "is affected"
2385 24CA Dispel Magic spell handler
          Stub: 0096:00FC
          Spell ID: 41, 46
          (No effect on effects with effect strength 255.  Dispel check is
          otherwise against lower 4 bits of effect strength, even if that does
          not represent caster level.)
24CB 24D5 "is praying"
24D6 251D Prayer spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0101
          Spell ID: 42
          (Effect strength is caster level, with bit 16 set to caster
          hostility flag.)
251E 252A "is un-cursed"
252B 253F "'s item is un-cursed"
2540 25F2 Remove Curse spell handler
          Stub: 0096:004D
          Spell ID: 43
          (Removes effect 36 and removes curses from items, displaying messages
          if either or both happen.)
25F3 2603 "has been cursed!"
2604 2630 Bestow Curse spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0106
          Spell ID: 44
2631 263C "is blinking"
263D 2669 Blink spell handler
          Stub: 0096:010B
          Spell ID: 45
266A 266A ""
266B 2763 Fireball spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0110
          Spell ID: 47, 64
2764 2887 Haste and slow logic
          Parameter 1: uint8 effect ID to remove
          Parameter 2: Boolean hostility flag to affect
          Parameter 3: Pointer to String
          (Adds effect after removing provided opposite effect.)
2888 2891 "is Hasted"
2892 28BB Haste spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0115
          Spell ID: 48
28BC 295A Lightning attack at location
          Parameter 1: int8 target X-coordinate
          Parameter 2: int8 target Y-coordinate
          Parameter 3: uint8 damage
          Parameter 4: int8 saving throw type (0...4)
          (Inflicts damage and prints messages, if there is a creature to
          damage at the location.  This is only for a specific location; an
          entire bolt is the next function.)
295B 2BB6 Lightning path
          Parameter 1: uint8 bolt length
          Parameter 2: uint8 damage
          Parameter 3: int8 saving throw type (0...4)
          Parameter 4: Boolean unknown
          (Follows angle defined by current creature and target coordinates at
          DS:6DB9.  Calls 28BC for any creature along the path; this does not
          include the target coordinates, which caller is expected to handle.)
2BB7 2BFE Lightning Bolt spell handler
          Stub: 0096:011A
          Spell ID: 51
2BFF 2C08 "is Slowed"
2C09 2C36 Slow spell handler
          Stub: 0096:011F
          Spell ID: 55
2C37 2C42 "is restored"
2C43 2DF7 Restoration spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0124
          Spell ID: 56
2DF8 2E01 "is Speedy"
2E02 2E42 Potion of Speed spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0129
          Spell ID: 57
          Item property: 80
2E43 2E4C "is Healed"
2E4D 2ED8 Keoghtum's Ointment spell handler
          Stub: 0096:012E
          Spell ID: 58
          Item property: 81
          (Removes effects 22, 34, 43, 44, 50, 55, and 57.  Does not reset
          status as it should if removing effect 55, which will outright kill a
          poisoned character.  Also restores 8+1d4 hit points.)
2ED9 2EE4 "is stronger"
2EE5 2F4C Potion of Giant Strength spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0133
          Spell ID: 59
          Item property: 82
2F4D 2F8B Javelin of Lightning spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0138
          Spell ID: 60
          Item property: 83
2F8C 2F98 "is paralyzed"
2F99 2FC5 Wand of Paralyzation spell handler
          Stub: 0096:013D
          Spell ID: 61
          Item property: 84
2FC6 2FCF "is Healed"
2FD0 301C Potion of Healing spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0142
          Spell ID: 62
          Item property: 85
          (Restores 2d4+2 hit points.)
301D 3029 "is invisible"
302A 3056 Dust of Disappearance spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0147
          Spell ID: 63
          Item property: 86
3057 3057 ""
3058 3091 Wand of Magic Missiles spell handler
          Stub: 0096:014C
          Spell ID: 65
          Item property: 88
          (Similar to the spell, but does 2d4+2 damage.  Not blocked by the
          Shield spell as unlike Fireball or Lightning Bolt, this is a separate
          handler.)
3092 3096 Unused spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0151
          Spell ID: 66
          Item property: 89
          (Something planned but never implemented.)
3097 30A1 "is Reading"
30A2 30CE Manual of Bodily Health spell handler
          Stub: 0096:0156
          Spell ID: 67
          Item property: 90
30CF 30D8 "Breathes!"
30D9 323C Bronze dragon breath effect handler
          Stub: 0096:015B
          Effect ID: 88
          (Removes invisibility from attacker when invoked.)
323D 3289 Item readability
          Stub: 0096:003E
          Parameter: Pointer to Item
          Return in AL: Boolean usability
          (Returns True if and only if the item slot field is 11...14.)
328A 3304 Remove spell from scroll
          Stub: 0096:0043
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Item
          Parameter 3: uint8 spell ID
          (Destroys scroll if no spells remain on scroll.)
3305 3312 "Casts a Spell"
3313 3319 "Spell:"
331A 3412 Print creature casting spell message
          Stub: 0096:0048
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to String
          Parameter 3: uint8 spell ID
          (In combat, the message is always "Casts a Spell" "Spell:".  Outside
          of combat, prints provided String.  In either case then prints name
          of spell.)
3413 37AF Initializate spell function pointer array
          Stub: 0096:0052
          (Defines a size-68 array at DS:6B84, all pointing to a stub that
          jumps to a function in overlay 23.  The array is 0-indexed; index 0
          is the UI for casting a spell.  Also defines effect handler 88, which
          uses local lightning bolt logic.  For index 0 cast spell UI:
          * 0096:0034 stub -> 3E45:0A91 Noncombat
          * 0068:0066 stub -> 2AA0:20C3 Combat
          which both do have parameters.)
37B0 37B4 Empty function
          Stub: 0096:0020

Segment 41C1 (IDA overlay 24): (GAME.OVR - add 2AA87 for offset)
Skill.
Begin End
0000 01AE Recalculate base skills
          Stub: 00AC:0025
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          (Recalculates THAC0, hit dice, base primary attacks, cleric spell
          slots, magic-user spell slots, base saving throws, and thief skills.)
01AF 0254 Award Wisdom bonus Cleric spell slots
          Stub: 00AC:002A
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
0255 0328 Recalculate base saving throws
          Stub: 00AC:002F
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          (Takes best saving throw considering class and level.)
0329 045D Recalculate thief skills
          Stub: 00AC:0034
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          (Considers level, Dexterity, and race.)
045E 0462 Empty function
          Stub: 00AC:0020

Segment 4208 (IDA overlay 25): (GAME.OVR - add 2AEEA for offset)
Begin End
0000 0025 Call effect handler
          Stub: 00B0:0025
          Parameter 1: uint8 handler effect ID (1...139)
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 3: Pointer to item *or* effect
          Parameter 4: Boolean item unreadied *or* effect removed
          (Calls into DS:682C function pointer array.)
0026 013F Remove effect
          Stub: 00B0:002A
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature with effect to remove
          Parameter 2: uint8 effect ID to remove
          Parameter 3: Pointer to Effect to remove
          (The passed Pointer to Effect is checked first; if it is nil, the
          creature's effects are searched for the first effect with a matching
          type.)
0140 015F Set of effects that have area around creature
0160 02F9 Trigger effect
          Parameter 1: Pointer to triggering Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 effect ID
          (Invokes any effect with effect ID that creature has.  Also accounts
          for area of effect of Silence 15' Radius, Protection from Evil/Good
          10' Radius, and Prayer.)
02FA 0ABA Trigger effects with condition
          Stub: 00B0:002F
          Parameter 1: uint8 effect condition type (0...19)
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Creature
          (As in Effect Format and other function descriptions.)
0ABB 0ACA "starts to cough"
0ACB 0AE6 "chokes and gags from nausea"
0AE7 0C4E Consider Stinking Cloud on Creature
          Stub: 00B0:0034
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          (No effect if no Stinking Cloud, if creature not in play, or it has
          any of effects 30, 31, 32, 111, or 125.  Creature otherwise must save
          vs. poison; success adds effect 30 for 1 minute, failure adds effect
          31 for 1d4+1 minutes.)
0C4F 0CB6 Attack roll without attacker
          Stub: 00B0:0039
          Parameter 1: Pointer to defending Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 60 minus THAC0
          Return in AL: Boolean success
          (Applies effects of type 16.)
0CB7 0D62 Attack roll
          Stub: 00B0:003E
          Parameter 1: Pointer to attacking Creature
          Parameter 2: Pointer to defending Creature
          Parameter 3: uint8 defender 60 minus AC
          Return in AL: Boolean success
          (* Remove invisibility from attacker.
           * Apply effects of type 10 and 16.
           * Apply ad hoc attack roll modifiers from:
             * GBVM $6E71 if attacker is allied to party
             * GBVM $6E70 if attacker is hostile to party
           * Return result of all the above with 1d20 attack roll.
           Defender AC should already have attacking from behind penalties
           applied.  Does not consider if defender is helpless.)
0D63 0DE2 Roll saving throw
          Stub: 00B0:0043
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: int8 saving throw type (0...4)
          Parameter 3: int8 saving throw modifier
          Return in AL: Boolean success
          (Rolls 1d20; 1 immediately returns False, 20 immediately returns
          True.  Roll then accounts for provided modifier, inherent creature
          bonus, and creature effects.)
0DE3 0E2D Roll XDY
          Stub: 00B0:0048
          Parameter 1: uint8 dice (X)
          Parameter 2: uint8 sides (Y)
          Return in AL: uint8 total rolled
          (There is no check for integer overflow.)
0E2E 0E51 Roll damage dice
          Stub: 00B0:004D
          Parameter 1: uint8 dice (X)
          Parameter 2: uint8 sides (Y)
          Return in AL: uint8 total rolled
          (As above, but also sets DS:681C to damage dice.  Does not set
          DS:6818 and does not actually do damage.)
0E52 0F05 Add effect
          Stub: 00B0:0052
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 effect ID
          Parameter 3: uint16 minutes remaining of effect
          Parameter 4: uint8 effect strength
          Parameter 5: Boolean effect removal calls effect handler flag
0F06 0FD1 Combat put creature out of play with status
          Stub: 00B0:0057
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 status (3...8)
          Parameter 3: Pointer to String
          (* Print creature name and provided message.
           * Flag creature as out of play.
           * If creature was not set to Running, set current HP to 0.
           * Call 00BA:2637 end creature actions.
           * Call 100A remove effects after HP 0, even if not 0.
0FD2 1009 Remove invisibility (effect 25)
          Stub: 00B0:005C
          Parameter: Pointer to creature
          (Checks for and removes all such effects.  Nothing happens if the
          creature doesn't have invisibility.  Does not remove the invisible
          effect from Dust of Disappearance, or the effect of the Ring of
          Invisibility.)
100A 1040 Remove effects after hit points reduced to 0
          Stub: 00B0:0061
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          (Uses the array at DS:0C14; effect IDs removed: 7, 11, 30...32,
          51...54, 58, 59, 74, 75, 95, 98, 137.)
1041 1077 Remove effects from AI every round
          Stub: 00B0:0066
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          (Uses the array at DS:0C24; effect IDs removed: 74, 75.)
1078 1080 "is Cured"
1081 10E3 Remove effect with message
          Stub: 00B0:006B
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 effect ID to remove
          Return in AL: Boolean effect removed
          (If creature has effect, removes effect from creature and prints
          message saying creature "is cured".  This message is immediately
          overwritten in some cases.  Nothing happens if creature lacks
          effect.)
10E4 110C Strength modifier effect strength
          Stub: 00B0:0070
          Parameter 1: uint8 base Strength
          Parameter 2: uint8 extraordinary Strength
          Return in AL: uint8 extraordinary Strength + 1 if base Strength is
            18; base Strength + 100 otherwise
          (Caller is expected to set bit 128 if this is lower than what the
          creature already has.)
110D 115B Strength effect to Strength
          Stub: 00B0:0075
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Effect
          Parameter 2: Pointer 1 to uint8 base Strength
          Parameter 3: Pointer 2 to uint8 extraordinary Strength
          Return in AL: Boolean Strength changed
          Return in both Pointers: Strength score represented by effect
          (The effect is assumed to have ID 12 or 38; it is caller's
          responsibility to check this.)
115C 1286 Adjust for new Strength effect
          Stub: 00B0:007A
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 base Strength
          Parameter 3: uint8 extraordinary Strength
          Parameter 4: Pointer to uint8 effect strength
          Return in AL: Boolean if creature Strength changed
          (Searches for other effects that affect Strength, and adjusts both
          creature Strength and any existing effect affecting Strength.  Does
          not actually create the new effect.)
1287 128D "takes "
128E 12A0 " points of damage "
12A1 12B9 "takes 1 point of damage "
12BA 12C3 "from Fire"
12C4 12CD "from Cold"
12CE 12DE "from Electricity"
12DF 12E8 "from Acid"
12E9 12F3 "from Magic"
12F4 1300 "lost a spell"
1301 130A "Goes Down"
130B 1319 ", and is Dying"
131A 1339 Set of status conditions not in combat
133A 1343 "is killed"
1344 1647 Inflict non-weapon damage on creature
          Stub: 00B0:007F
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 damage
          Parameter 3: uint8 saving throw reduction type (0 = full damage,
            1 = no damage, 2 = half damage)
          Parameter 4: Boolean saving throw success
          (For both combat and non-combat; triggers non-weapon damage effects
          first.  Also handles consequences of damage.  All other attack roll
          and damage calculations come before this.)
1648 1655 "is Unaffected"
1656 173C Add effect with message
          Stub: 00B0:0084
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 effect ID
          Parameter 3: uint16 minutes remaining
          Parameter 4: uint8 effect strength
          Parameter 5: Boolean effect removal calls effect handler flag
          Parameter 6: Boolean always unaffected
          Parameter 7: Boolean saving throw result
          Parameter 8: Pointer to message String if saving throw fails
          (Caller's responsibility to determine result of saving throw.  If
          the saving throw is successful, the creature is immune to the effect,
          or caller specifies always unaffected, "is Unaffected" is printed
          and nothing else happens.  Otherwise, if minutes remaining exceeds
          that of an existing timed effect of the same effect ID, the existing
          effect is removed.  Then the effect is added to the creature as
          requested.)
173D 175E Set of status conditions that restore hit points
175D 1847 Restore hit points to creature
          Stub: 00B0:0089
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 hit points to restore
          Parameter 3: Boolean bypass mummy rot
          Return in AL: Boolean was healed or was already at maximum HP
          (Creature must be Okay, Animated, Unconscious, or Dying for this to
          work.)
1848 185B "stands up and grins"
185C 1868 "gets back up"
1869 1731 Revive dead Creature
          Stub: 00B0:008E
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 starting hit points
          Return in AL: Boolean was revived
          (Will not revive Creature during combat if there isn't space.)
1932 1936 Empty function
          Stub: 00B0:0020

Segment 439C (IDA overlay 27): (GAME.OVR - add 2C8CF for offset)
Menu and string linked list.
Begin End
0000 0066 Find member in String linked list with index
          Stub: 03C5:0025
          Parameter 1: int16 index
          Parameter 2: Pointer to String linked list
          Return in DX:AX: Pointer to String linked list member (nil if index
            invalid)
0067 00AA String linked list count
          Parameer: Pointer to String linked list
          Return in AX: uint16 count of items in String linked list
00AB 00CA Set of digits and uppercase letters
00CB 01B9 Parse horizontal menu string (nested procedure of 03BD)
          Parameter: Pointer to menu String
          (Sets enclosing scope's array of uint8: first element is undefined,
          second element is number of options, followed by beginning
          and ending index for each option.)
01BA 01D9 Set of digits and uppercase letters (same as 439C:00AB)
01DA 037C Display horizontal menu string (nested procedure of 03BD)
          Parameter: current horizontal menu option
          (Displays current option all highlighted, displays only the first
          character of other options highlighted, then clears the rest of the
          line.)
037D 039C Set with space, digits, and uppercase letters
039D 039C Set with nonzero digits and backslash
03BD 06FA Horizontal menu
          Stub: 03C5:002A
          Parameter 1: Pointer to query String
          Parameter 2: Pointer to menu String
          Parameter 3: uint8 query color (0...15)
          Parameter 4: uint8 menu normal color (0...15)
          Parameter 5: uint8 menu highlight color (0...15)
          Parameter 6: Boolean reinterpret '1'...'9' and '\'
          Parameter 7: Boolean animate animation data
          Parameter 8: Pointer to Boolean extended scan code flag
          Return in AL: uint8 0 if Escape is pressed
                        if Parameter 6 is True, return as extended scan code:
                          * keypad extended scan code if 1...4, 6...9 pressed
                          * " " if 5 pressed (equivalent of Alt-D)
                          * "7" if backslash is pressed (... what?)
                        extended scan code for any actual extended keypress
                        char code otherwise
          Return in both Boolean and DS:6B2C: AL is an extended scan code
          (The query and menu Strings combined must fit on the bottom line of
          the screen.  A character within the menu String is a valid menu
          choice if and only if it is either a digit or an uppercase character.
          If animation is desired, the different frames are displayed while
          waiting for a kepress.  Also called as part of vertical menu.)
06FB 0710 Clear bottom line of screen
          Stub: 03C5:002F
0C33 0CC4 Vertical menu move one page (nested procedure of 0D9A)
          Parameter: Boolean move down
0CC5 0D87 Vertical menu move one line (nested procedure of 0D9A)
          Parameter: Boolean move down
0D88 0D8D " Next"
0D8E 0D93 " Prev"
0D94 0D99 " Exit"
0D9A 10A9 Vertical menu
          Stub: 03C5:0034
          Parameter 1: Pointer to query String
          Parameter 2: Pointer to menu String (can be empty)
          Parameter 3: uint8 query color (0...15)
          Parameter 4: uint8 menu normal color (0...15)
          Parameter 5: uint8 menu highlight color (0...15)
          Parameter 6: int8 upper left char column
          Parameter 7: int8 upper left char row
          Parameter 8: int8 lower right char column
          Parameter 9: int8 lower right char row
          Parameter 10: Pointer to String linked list of menu choices
          Parameter 11: Boolean flag to add Exit to horizontal menu
          Parameter 12: Pointer 1 to Boolean unknown
          Parameter 13: Pointer 2 to int16 index
          Parameter 14: Pointer 3 to Pointer to selected String
          Return in AL: 0 if Escape pressed or Exit selected
                        char code otherwise
          Return at Pointer 2: uint16 index of selected String in list
                               (0 if Escape/Exit)
          Return at Pointer 3: Pointer to selected String
                               (nil if Escape/Exit)
10AA 10B0 "Yes No"
10B1 10D0 Set of valid answers to Yes/No question
10D1 113F Yes/No menu
          Stub: 03C5:0039
          Parameter 1: Pointer to query String
          Parameter 2: uint8 query color (0...15)
          Parameter 3: uint8 menu normal color (0...15)
          Parameter 4: uint8 menu highlight color (0...15)
          Return in AL: uint8 char code ("Y" or "N" only)
          (Implemented as horizontal menu.)
1140 11F2 Allocate String linked list
          Stub: 03C5:003E
          Parameter 1: int16 count of members in list
          Parameter 2: Pointer to Pointer String linked list
          Return at Pointer: Pointer to new String linked list
          (Every String in the new linked list is empty.)
11F3 1244 Free String linked list
          Parameter: Pointer to Pointer to String linked list
          (Frees all Strings in the linked list.)
1245 1249 Empty function
          Stub: 03C5:0020

Segment 44C1 (IDA overlay 28): (GAME.OVR - add 2DB87 for offset)
Map view.
Begin End
0000 00C6 Display wilderness map view
          Stub: 03CA:002A
016D 029F Display map view
          Stub: 03CA:0025
          (For both 3D map and wilderness.)
02A0 02A4 Empty function
          Stub: 03CA:0020

Segment 44EC (IDA overlay 29): (GAME.OVR - add 2DE38 for offset)
Wilderness graphics.
Begin End
0000 0205 Build wilderness map graphics
          Stub: 03CD:0025
          Parameter 1: int8 upper left X-coordinate
          Parameter 2: int8 upper left Y-coordinate
          (Places wilderness map graphics in view image buffer.)
0206 0206 ""
0207 0282 Draw wilderness noncombat windows
          Stub: 03CD:002A
0283 0287 Empty function
          Stub: 03CD:0020

Segment 4515 (IDA overlay 30): (GAME.OVR - add 2E0CE for offset)
Begin End
0000 004F Display image buffer
          Stub: 03D0:0025
          Parameter 1: int16 column in char
          Parameter 2: int16 row in char
          Parameter 3: Boolean animation flag
          Parameter 4: Pointer to image buffer
0050 006F Display portrait head
          Parameter 1: uint8 column in char
          Parameter 2: uint8 row in char
          Parameter 3: Pointer to image buffer
          (No special adjustments; would work for any images displayed simply.)
0070 0092 Display portrait body
          Parameter 1: uint8 column in char
          Parameter 2: uint8 row in char(same as head)
          Parameter 3: Pointer to image buffer
          (Adds 5 to char row to display body below head.)
0093 0096 "PIC"
0097 009C "FINAL"
009D 00A1 "*.dax"
00A2 048E Load animation data
          Stub: 03D0:002A
          Parameter 1: Pointer to file name without disk number
          Parameter 2: uint8 picture ID
          Parameter 3: Boolean transparency flag
          Parameter 4: Pointer to Pointer to animation data
          (Parameter 1 is expected to be "PIC", "FINAL", or "SPRIT".  Loads
          data from disk, then allocates and sets up image buffers for every
          frame.)
048F 04F7 Free animation data
          Stub: 03D0:002F
          Parameter: Pointer to Pointer to animation data
          (Frees all image buffers in the animation.)
04F9 05CE Display character portrait
          Stub: 03D0:0034
          (Uses the current creature.  Drawn in upper right of main window,
          and adds a border.)
05CF 05D3 "HEAD"
05D4 05D8 "BODY"
05D9 0696 Load portrait image buffers
          Stub: 03D0:003E
          Parameter 1: uint8 head DAX file ID (in HEAD?.DAX)
          Parameter 2: uint8 body DAX file ID (in BODY?.DAX)
          (Loading does not happen if file ID is 255 or matches the current ID.
          IDs and image buffer pointers are stored in the global variables
          at DS:6B00.)
0697 06E8 Display portrait image buffers
          Stub: 03D0:0039
          Parameter 1: uint8 column in char
          Parameter 2: uint8 row in char
          Parameter 3: Boolean display head image buffer only
06E9 0707 "Illegal range in Show3DSprite."
0708 07BF Display 3D monster sprite
          Parameter 1: uint8 monster distance (1...3)
          Parameter 2: Pointer to monster animation data
07C0 07C4 Empty function
          Stub: 03D0:0020

Segment 4592 (IDA overlay 31): (GAME.OVR - add 2E8F7 for offset)
3D map.
Begin End
031F 034F Validate 3D map coordinates
          Parameter 1: int8 X-coordinate
          Parameter 2: int8 Y-coordinate
          Return in AL: Boolean validity
          (Returns True if and only if both coordinates are 0...15.)
0350 047A Get barrier type
          Stub: 03D5:002F
          Parameter 1: int8 3D map X-coordinate
          Parameter 2: int8 3D map Y-coordinate
          Parameter 3: uint8 3D map facing (0...7)
          Return in AL: uint8 barrier (0...3)
          (If coordinates are not valid, returns 0 if map ID is 0 or 10;
          corrects coordinates to valid range otherwise.)
047B 0579 Get wall type
          Stub: 03D5:002A
          Parameter 1: int8 3D map X-coordinate
          Parameter 2: int8 3D map Y-coordinate
          Parameter 3: uint8 3D map facing (0...7)
          Return in AL: uint8 wall (0...15)
          (If coordinates are not valid, returns 0 if map ID is 0 or 10;
          corrects coordinates to valid range otherwise.)
057A 05F2 Get event
          Stub: 03D5:0034
          Parameter 1: int8 3D map X-coordinate
          Parameter 2: int8 3D map Y-coordinate
          Return in AL: uint8 event (0...255)
          (If coordinates are not valid, returns 0 if map ID is 0 or 10;
          corrects coordinates to valid range otherwise.)
05F3 05FC Display view image buffer
          (Simply calls 0464:1B52.  Probably was a wrapper that lost everything
          else.)
05FD 0DB3 Display 3D map view
          Stub: 03D5:0039
          Parameter 1: int8 3D map X-coordinate
          Parameter 2: int8 3D map Y-coordinate
          Parameter 3: uint8 3D map facing (0...7)
0DB4 0DBB "WALLDEF"
0DBC 0DC0 ".dax"
0DC1 0DE7 "Unable to load wallset in LoadWallSet."
0DE8 0E07 (unknown Set)
0E08 109C Load 3D wall set
          Stub: 03D5:003E
          Parameter 1: uint8 file ID
          Parameter 2: uint8 unknown
          (Loads from WALLDEF?.DAX; also loads related 8x8 symbol sets.)
109D 10A0 "GEO"
10A1 10A5 ".dax"
10A6 10C6 "Unable to load geo in Load3DMap"
10C7 1205 Load 3D map
          Parameter: uint8 map ID (0...32)
          Stub: 03D5:0043
1206 120A Empty function
          Stub: 03D5:0020

Segment 46B3 (IDA overlay 33): (GAME.OVR - add 2FB52 for offset)
Begin End
0000 002D Signum
          Stub: 03DB:0025
          Parameter: int16 value
          Return in AX: -1 if negative, 0 if zero, 1 if positive
          (Turbo Pascal doesn't have this; neither does C/C++.  BASIC
          interpreters of the era typically do have this.)
057B 0906 Is direction towards target
          Stub: 03DB:0034
          Parameter 1: int8 active creature X-coordinate
          Parameter 2: int8 active creature Y-coordinate
          Parameter 3: int8 target creature X-coordinate
          Parameter 4: int8 target creature Y-coordinate
          Parameter 5: uint8 direction (0...7; 8 or 255 for no direction)
          Return in AL: Boolean
          (* Always returns False if any parameter coordinate is out of bounds.
           * Always returns True if active and target creature either are or
             would be at the same location.
           * Otherwise, returns True only if the direction to the target is the
             best direction to take.)
0BD9 0BDD Empty function
          Stub: 03DB:0020

Segment 4771 (IDA overlay 34): (GAME.OVR - add 3073A for offset)
Combat map.
Begin End
0000 0067 Get icon tile delta
          Stub: 03E0:0025
          Parameter 1: uint8 icon size (0...4)
          Parameter 2: uint8 icon tile loop index (0...3)
          Parameter 3: Pointer to int8 icon X-coordinate delta
          Parameter 4: Pointer to int8 icon Y-coordinate delta
          Return in AL: Boolean Pointers have valid information
          Return at Pointers: icon coordinate deltas
          (For handling creatures whose icon takes more than 1 tile; callers
          are expected to iterate over all four values of parameter 2.  Uses
          the array at DS:2848; -1 represents an unused coordinate delta, as
          the icon primary coordinates are always at the upper left.  Always
          returns False if icon size is 0, used to indicate the creature is out
          of play.)
0068 00E2 Calculate creature combat arena coordinate deltas
00E3 0104 Set combat palette
          Stub: 03E0:002A
          (Combat mapping: color 0 to 8, color 8 to 0.  No effect if not EGA.)
0105 0126 Set noncombat palette
          Stub: 03E0:002F
          (Normal mapping: color 0 to 0, color 8 to 8.  No effect if not EGA.)
03A0 04BD Generate combat arena auxiliary arrays
          Stub: 03E0:0039
          (Generates:
           * Combat arena creature index array at DS:60DB
           * Creature X-coordinate combat arena delta array at DS:604B
           * Creature Y-coordinate combat arena delta array at DS:6093.)
04BE 052A Get contents of combat arena at coordinates
          Stub: 03E0:003E
          Parameter 1: int8 X-coordinate
          Parameter 2: int8 Y-coordinate
          Parameter 3: Pointer 1 to uint8 creature index (0 for no creature)
          Parameter 4: Pointer 2 to uint8 combat unknown 1 index
          Return at Pointers: contents of combat arena at requested location
          (Returns 0 in both pointers if coordinates are invalid.)
052B 06E8 Update combat map view image buffer
          Stub: 03E0:0043
          Parameter 1: int8 combat map view X-coordinate (valid range 0...6)
          Parameter 2: int8 combat map view Y-coordinate (valid range 0...6)
          Parameter 3: uint8 Creature index (can be 0)
          (Updates a single tile in the combat map view.  If supplied creature
          index is 0, determines if there is a creature to display; updates
          with combat map terrain if there isn't one.)
06E9 0719 Validate combat map view coordinates
          Stub: 03E0:0048
          Parameter 1: int8 combat map view X-coordinate (valid range 0...6)
          Parameter 2: int8 combat map view Y-coordinate (valid range 0...6)
          Return in AL: Boolean coordinates valid
071A 07D3 Is creature in combat map view
          Stub: 03E0:004D
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: Boolean whole creature flag
          Return in AL: Boolean if creature is in map view
          (Always returns False if creature is out of play.  The Boolean
          parameter specifies if only part of a Creature is sufficient.)
07D4 0995 Build combat map view image buffer
          Parameter 1: int8 combat map view X-coordinate
          Parameter 2: int8 combat map view Y-coordinate
          Parameter 3: uint8 coordinate delta (3 for the full 7x7 view; 255 is
            valid but treated as special)
          Return in AL: Boolean if input parameters are valid
0996 0AF7 Display combat map view
          Stub: 03E0:0052
          Parameter 1: int8 X-coordinate (0...49)
          Parameter 2: int8 Y-coordinate (0...24)
          Parameter 3: uint8 coordinate delta (3 for the full 7x7 view; 255 is
            valid but treated as special)
          Parameter 4: uint8 direction (0...8, 8 = no direction)
0BE7 0C0E Get creature X-coordinate
          Stub: 03E0:005C
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: int8 X-coordinate (0...49)
0C0F 0C36 Get creature Y-coordinate
          Stub: 03E0:0061
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: int8 Y-coordinate (0...24)
0C37 0C5E Get creature icon size
          Stub: 03E0:0066
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: uint8 icon size (0...4), 0 means out of play
0C5F 0CB8 Get index of Creature in DS:65BD Creature array
          Stub: 03E0:006B
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          Return in AL: uint8 index (0 if not found)
0E11 01A6 Reduced to 0 HP graphics and sound
          Stub: 03E0:0075
          Parameter: Pointer to Creature
          (* Sets creature initiative, movement, spell being cast, and
             guarding flag to 0.
           * Display graphics and plays sound effect.)
10A7 1297 Is valid location for Creature
          Stub: 03E0:007A
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: int8 X-coordinate
          Parameter 3: int8 Y-coordinate
          Parameter 4: Boolean unknown
          Return in AL: Boolean
          (Does more than simply return Boolean.)
1298 12FA Display combat map view centered at creature
          Stub: 03E0:007F
          Parameter 1: Pointer to Creature
          Parameter 2: uint8 coordinate delta (3 for the full 7x7 view; 255 is
            valid but treated as special)
          Parameter 3: Boolean unknown
12FB 12FF Empty function
          Stub: 03E0:0020

Segment 48A1 (IDA overlay 35): (GAME.OVR - add 31A6C for offset)
2D map tile set.
Begin End
0000 0021 "Start range error in Load24x24Set"
0022 00F0 Load 2D map tile set image buffer
          Parameter 1: Pointer to filename (without extension)
          Parameter 2: uint8 image buffer data additional size multiplier
          Parameter 3: int8 unknown and unused
          (Used for both combat and outdoors.  A 2D map tile set image buffer
          should always be 24x24 pixels, or 3x3 chars.  Quits to DOS if a disk
          error occurs.)
00F1 014D Copy 2D map tile to view image buffer
          Stub: 03E9:002A
          Parameter 1: int8 column in char
          Parameter 2: int8 row in char
          Parameter 3: uint8 tile ID
          Parameter 4: int8 unknown and unused
014E 01AF Free icon animation (2 image buffers each)
          Stub: 03E9:002F
          Parameter: uint8 icon animation index
01B0 01B5 "CHEAD"
01B6 01BB "CBODY"
01BC 01C2 "COMSPR"
01C3 01C7 "ICON"
01C8 04FB Load icon animation (2 image buffers each)
          Stub: 03E9:0034
          Parameter 1: Pointer to file name (without disk number)
          Parameter 2: uint8 ID of file in data archive
          Parameter 3: uint8 icon animation index
          (* "CBODY", "CHEAD", "COMSPR", and "ICON" do not have disk numbers
             appended; anything else does.
           * "CBODY" or "CHEAD" only: "S" or "T" is appended for short/tall;
             if "T", 64 is added to ID.)
0640 0644 Empty function
          Stub: 03E9:0020

Segment 4906 (IDA overlay 37): (GAME.OVR - add 3211F for offset)
Logging.  This presumably once had much more.
Begin End
0000 0003 " , "
0004 00F6 Print hit point drain log
          Stub: 03EE:0025
          Parameter 1: Pointer to String
          Parameter 2: uint8 maximum hit points before level drain
          Parameter 3: uint8 current hit points before level drain
          Parameter 4: uint8 level drained hit points before level drain
          (Does nothing unless STING Ctrl-D is active.)
00F7 00FB Empty function
          Stub: 03EE:0020

Segment 4916 (IDA overlay 39): (GAME.OVR - add 32235 for offset)
8x8 symbol.
Begin End
0000 001F Set of valid 8x8 sets (0...4).
0020 0024 "8x8d"
0025 0038 "unable to load 8x8D"
0039 003A "-"
003B 0139 Load 8x8 graphics symbol set
          Stub: 0428:0025
          Parameter 1: uint8 ID of file in data archive
          Parameter 2: uint8 8x8 set ID (0...4)
          (The pointer to the symbol set is stored in the array at DS:5E3A.
          The transparency color for an 8x8 symbol set is always 13, hot pink.
          Returns doing nothing if set ID is invalid; quits to DOS if there is
          any disk error.)
013A 015C "Bad symbol number in Put8x8Symbol."
015D 02AC Put 8x8 symbol
          Stub: 0428:002A
          Parameter 1: int8 char column
          Parameter 2: int8 char row
          Parameter 3: uint16 symbol number (1...286)
          Parameter 4: Boolean combat arena flag
          Parameter 5: Boolean unknown
          (Puts symbol on screen if combat area flag is False, otherwise
          copies symbol to combat area.  Mapping of symbol numbers to symbol
          sets:
                1...45: 0  For the ID within a set, subtract the lowest
              46...115: 1  symbol number in that set.
             116...185: 2
             186...255: 3
             256...286: 4)
02AD 02B1 Empty function
          Stub: 0428:0020

SECTION 12.6.4 - Data Segment
-----------------------------

This assumes you are using v1.3.  The following is not comprehensive, although
it's approaching that.

All provided addresses are in hexadecimal and are their location in the data
segment (DS).  Gold Box Virtual Machine addresses and DS offsets are *not* the
same, though I'd expect their equivalents to be same running on the original
6502 (not x86) architecture.

More complicated data structures are provided in the Data Structures section.

Executable addresses: These are loaded before any machine code executes and are
present in the executable.  Anything declared by a programmer should not change
unless the programmer does so (most of these are constant), but Turbo Pascal
default global variables can (like errno in C).  To convert to the location in
the decompressed executable, add 0xD0A0.

Begin End
0000 0001 Pointed to by the nil near data pointer; should always be 0.  In most
          modern operating systems/programming langauges, attempting to
          dereference nil causes a fatal error; in DOS programs it does not,
          but for DS should only be done to check if some misbehaving code has
          put something here.  Not present before v1.3, so that's likely new
          intelligence on the compiler's part; the compiler does not print any
          error message before exiting if this is not 0, unlike more recent DOS
          compilers.
0002 0112 Copy protection array; size 13, 21 bytes each.
0113 0113 (byte alignment)
0114 0119 Effect IDs removed by Cure Disease, 1-indexed; size 6, 1 byte each.
011A 02B3 Temple spell String array; size 10, 41 bytes each.
02B4 02F1 (unknown)
02F2 02F5 Map direction to combat direction mapping array, 0-indexed; size 4, 1
          byte each.
02F6 0341 (unknown)
0342 0381 Gnome THAC0 bonus monster String array, 1-indexed; size 4, 16 bytes
          each.
0382 0401 Dwarf THAC0 bonus monster String array, 1-indexed; size 8, 16 bytes
          each.
0402 0481 Dwarf/gnome AC bonus vs. giant monster string array, 1-indexed; size
          8 (last 3 entries are empty), 16 bytes each.
0482 04B5 Turn undead table, by undead type then by cleric level, 1-indexed;
          size 10*10, 1 byte each.  Table only exists down to Vampire;
          0 = destroyed, -1 = 6+1d6 destroyed.
04B6 04DE 3D map exploration menu.
04DF 0507 2D map exploration menu.
0508 0530 Camp main menu String.
0531 0559 Camp magic menu String.
055A 0583 Camp alter menu String.
0584 05AC Camp order menu String array, 0-indexed; size 2, 41 bytes each.
05AD 05D5 (unknown)
05D6 05DD Item usability bit by class array, 0-indexed; size 8, 1 byte each.
05DE 05E5 Basic class bitmask by class array, 0-indexed; size 8, 1 byte each.
05E6 05EF (unknown)
05F0 0618 Main menu option String.
0619 07E6 Main menu option record array; size 11, 42 bytes each.  The last byte
          in each option is a Boolean that flags whether the option is valid
          (and may be changed).
07E7 07E7 (byte alignment)
07E8 08B4 Create character icon menu option string array, 1-indexed; size 5, 41
          bytes each.
08B5 08B5 (byte alignment)
08B6 08BD Starting HP dice by class array, 0-indexed; size 8, 1 byte each.
08BE 08C5 Starting HP sides by class array, 0-indexed; size 8, 1 byte each.
08C6 08C7 Character icon animation height marker array, 1-indexed; size 2, 1
          byte each.
08C8 08D7 NPC random head ID array, 0/1-indexed; size 2*8, 1 byte each.
          (The first dimension for these five arrays is gender.)
08D8 08E1 NPC cleric random body ID array, 0/1-indexed; size 2*5, 1 byte each.
08E2 08EB NPC fighter random body ID array, 0/1-indexed; size 2*5, 1 byte each.
08EC 08F5 NPC MU random body ID array, 0/1-indexed; size 2*5, 1 byte each.
08F6 08FF NPC thief random body ID array, 0/1-indexed; size 2*5, 1 byte each.
0900 090A Unknown Yarash's Pyramid array, 0-indexed; size 11, 1 byte each.
090B 091C Unknown Yarash's Pyramid array, 0-indexed; size 18, 1 byte each.
091D 092C Unknown Yarash's Pyramid array; size 16, 1 byte each.
092D 093C Unknown Yarash's Pyramid array; size 16, 1 byte each.
093D 094C Unknown Yarash's Pyramid array; size 16, 1 byte each.
094D 095E Unknown Yarash's Pyramid array, 0-indexed; size 9, 2 bytes each.
095F 0970 Unknown Yarash's Pyramid array, 0-indexed; size 9, 2 bytes each
0971 0971 (byte alignment)
0972 0AA1 Random item array; size 19, 16 bytes each.
0AA2 0C13 Spell level String array, 1-indexed; size 9, 41 bytes each.
0C14 0C23 Effect IDs to remove when reduced to 0 HP, 1-indexed; size 16, 1 byte
          each.
0C24 0C25 Effect IDs to remove with unknown trigger, 1-indexed; size 2, 1 byte
          each.
0C26 0C35 Sky/ceiling color map, 0-indexed; size 16, 1 byte each.
0C36 0C65 Wilderness map special location array, 1-indexed; size 9, 6 bytes
          each.
0C6C 0C7B Unknown animation data array; size 16, 1 byte each.
0C7C 0C8B Unknown animation data array; size 16, 1 byte each.
0C8C 0CD1 (unknown)
0CD2 0CE1 Unknown icon animation array; size 16, 1 byte each.
0CE2 0CF1 Unknown icon animation array; size 16, 1 byte each.
0CF2 0D01 Unknown icon animation array; size 16, 1 byte each.
0D02 0D15 (unknown)
0D16 0D19 Set of punctuation for splitting up String; 32...63 only, 4 bytes.
0D1A 0D23 Filename invalid char array, 1-indexed; size 10, 1 byte each.
0D24 0D37 Coin valuation in copper array; size 5, 4 bytes each.
0D38 0F02 Class String array, 0-indexed; size 17, 27 bytes each.
0F03 0F52 Race String array, 0-indexed; size 8, 10 bytes each.
0F53 0FEB Alignment String array, 0-indexed; size 9, 17 bytes each.
0FEC 0FF9 Gender String array, 0-indexed; size 2, 7 bytes each.
0FFA 1046 Money String array, 0-indexed; size 7, 11 bytes each.
1047 10BA Status String array, 0-indexed; size 9, 13 bytes each.
10BB 10BB (byte alignment)
10BC 25A6 Item name component String array, 1-indexed; size 255, 21 bytes each.
25A7 25A7 (byte alignment)
25A8 25BF Compass direction String array, 0-indexed; size 8, 3 bytes each.
25C0 25C8 Direction by Y/X-axis delta 2D array, -1/-1-indexed; size 3*3, 1 byte
          each.
25C9 25CC EGA font bitplane bitmask array, 0-indexed; size 4, 1 byte each.
25CD 25D4 CGA font color bitmask array, 0-indexed; size 4, 2 bytes each.
25D5 25E4 Font 16-color EGA to 4-color CGA mapping array; size 16, 1 byte each.
25E5 25F4 CGA position bitmask array; size 8, 2 bytes each.
25F5 25F5 (byte alignment)
25F6 25F9 EGA pixel bitplane bitmask array; size 4, 1 byte each.
25FA 2609 Color then column mapping to CGA value 2D array, 0-indexed; size 4*4,
          1 byte each.
260A 2611 (unknown)
2612 2631 Sound effect array; size 16, 2 bytes each.  It's just a table of
          int16 from -1...14.
2632 2721 "Insert disk # in drive " array, 1-indexed; size 8, 30 bytes each.
2722 272B Subtrahends to convert 8x8 symbol number to 8x8 set ID array; size 5,
          2 bytes each.
272C 2735 (unknown)
2736 273E X-axis delta by direction array, 0-indexed; size 9, 1 byte each.
273F 2747 Y-axis delta by direction array, 0-indexed, size 9, 1 byte each.
2748 284B Combat unknown 1 array, 1-indexed; size 65, 4 bytes each.
284C 286B Icon coordinate delta array, 1/0-indexed; size 4*4, 2 bytes each;
          unused coordinates are represented by (-1,-1).
286C 286F Helplessness effect ID array, 1-indexed; size 4, 1 byte each.
2870 287D Head ID to DAX ID mapping array, 1-indexed; size 14, 1 byte each.
287E 2889 Body ID to DAX ID mapping array, 1-indexed; size 12, 1 byte each.
288A 288B (unknown; probably unused)
288C 2894 Digit to extended scan code array, 1-indexed; size 9, 1 byte each.
2895 290D (unknown)
290E 2911 2x2 delta array index array, 1-indexed; size 4, 1 byte each.
2912 3209 Spell String array, 1-indexed; size 56, 41 bytes each.
320A 3639 Spell table, 1-indexed; size 67, 16 bytes each.  The first 56 entries
          are same spells given in Creature Format; the next 11 represent
          magical effects 80...90 in Item Format.  Spell ID 0 in some cases is
          the special case of the spell selection UI and is not part of this
          array.
363A 3647 GBVM clock component limit array, 0-indexed; size 7, 2 bytes each.
          This defines a round as 10 segments, but I don't believe that is ever
          directly used.
3648 3C77 Wilderness icon map, 0-indexed; size 36*44, 1 byte each.
3C78 3C7A Wilderness X-coordinate correction array, 2-indexed; size 3, 1 byte
          each.
3C7B 3C7B (byte alignment)
3C7C 3CD3 THAC0 by class then level (0...10) 2D array; size 8*11, 1 byte each.
          THAC0 is represented by (60 - THAC0).
3CD4 3CF5 (unknown)
3CF6 3CFB Default character icon colors, 1-indexed; size 6, 1 byte each.
3CFC 3D43 Thief ability table by level, 1-indexed; size 9, 8 bytes each.
3D44 3D7B Thief ability adjustment table by race, 1-indexed (monster race not
          included); size 7*8, 1 byte each .
3D7C 3DB2 Thief ability adjustment table by Dexterity, 9-indexed; size 11
          (9...19), 5 bytes each.  Any out-of-range Dexterity will result in
          out-of-bounds array values.
3DB3 3E22 Minimum/maximum statistics by race, 1-indexed (monster race not
          included); size 7, 16 bytes each.
3E23 3E76 Classes allowed by race array, 0-indexed; size 7, 12 bytes each
          (includes multi-class; monster race not included).  First byte is the
          number of classes, followed by the list of classes, padded with 0.
3E77 3F3A Starting age table, 4 bytes each, 0-indexed; size 7*7, 4 bytes each.
          Grouped by class (excluding monks and multi-class) then race
          (excluding monster).  Multi-classed characters use the highest age.
          Starting age is [byte 0] + [256 * byte 1] + [byte 2]d[byte 3].
3F3B 3F80 Age category table by race, 1-indexed (monster race not included);
          size 7, 10 bytes each .  Each entry is an array of 5 16-bit integers
          with the maximum age for each of the 5 age categories.
3F81 3FE6 Minimum statistics by class table (including multi-class); size 17, 6
          bytes each.
3FE7 4090 Alignments allowed by class table (including multi-class); size 17,
          10 bytes each.  First byte is the number of alignments, followed
          by the list of alignments, padded with 0.
4091 40A2 Constitution bonus hit point for non-warriors array, 3-indexed; size
          18 (3...20), 1 byte each.  Any Constitution outside of this will read
          out-of-bounds array values (see Statistic: Constitution for some).
40A3 4262 Experience and spells by class table, 0-indexed; size 8, 56 bytes
          each.
4263 4272 Starting gold array by class table, 0-indexed; size 8, 2 bytes each.
          First byte is number of dice to roll, second byte is number of sides.
4273 43DA Saving throw table, 0/1-indexed; size 8*9, 5 bytes each.  Arranged
          by class, then by level (1...9).
43DB 43DB (byte alignment)
43DC 43DD OvrResult.  (TPv6PG, p. 174.)
43DE 43DF (unknown)
43E0 43E1 OvrTrapCount.  (TPv6PG, p. 174.)
43E2 43E3 OvrLoadCount.  (TPv6PG, p. 174.)
43E4 43E4 OvrFileMode.  (TPv6PG, p. 174.)
43E5 43E5 (byte alignment)
43E6 43E7 Size of overlay probationary area, in units of 16 bytes.  (Not used
          by Pool of Radiance.)
43E8 43EB Overlay file position.
43EC 43ED OvrCodeList.  (TPv6PG, p. 137.)
43EE 43EF OvrHeapSize.  (TPv6PG, p. 137.)
43F0 43F3 OvrDebugPtr. (TPv6PG, p. 137; points to 0AA2:02E5).
43F4 43F5 OvrHeapOrg.  (TPv6PG, p. 210.)
43F6 43F7 OvrHeapPtr.  (TPv6PG, p. 137.)
43F8 43F9 OvrHeapEnd.  (TPv6PG, p. 210.)
43FA 43FB OvrLoadList.  (TPv6PG, p. 137.)
43FC 43FD OvrDosHandle.  (TPv6PG, p. 137.)
43FE 43FF OvrEmsHandle.  (TPv6PG, p. 137.  Not used by Pool of Radiance.)
4400 4403 HeapOrg.  (TPv6PG, p. 211.)
4404 4407 HeapPtr.  (TPv6PG, p. 211.)
4408 440B HeapEnd.  (TPv6PG, p. 210.)
440C 440F FreeList.  (TPv6PG, p. 215.)
4410 4413 (unknown; everything on TPv6PG pp. 136-137 is accounted for)
4414 4417 HeapError (TPv6PG, p. 217; starts at 0AF8:00A9, redefined by SSI.)
4418 441B ExitProc.  (TPv6PG chapter 19.  Not used by Pool of Radiance.)
441C 441D Runtime error code; also ExitCode (TPv6PG chapter 19).
441E 4421 ErrorAddr.  (TPv6PG chapter 19.)
4422 4423 PrefixSeg.  (TPv6PG, p. 138.)
4424 4425 StackLimit.  (TPv6PG, p. 138.  Not checked by Pool of Radiance.)
4426 4427 Current IOResult code, aka InOutRes (TPv6PG, p. 138, 342).  The
          documentation is not consistent on whether this is signed or not,
          though it should always be 0...199 anyway.
4428 442B RandSeed.  (Current value of the RNG seed.)
442C 442C FileMode.  (TPv6PG, p. 133.)
442D 442D Test8087.  (TPv6PG, p. 138; always 0 if {$N-}.)

Global variables not predefined in the executable: these begin at DS:442E.
These are *not* automatically set to 0 as they would be in C/C++.
Begin End
442E 442E ECL return control to player flag.
442F 442F ECL opcode 20 NEWECL done flag.
4430 4430 ECL opcode 0A LOAD CHARACTER executed without removing creature flag.
4431 4431 ECL opcode 21 LOAD FILES or 37 LOAD PIECES executed flag.
4432 4432 Entering main game loop flag.
4433 4433 ECL opcode 37 LOAD PIECES executed flag.
4434 4434 ECL opcode 21 LOAD FILES executed flag.
4435 4435 Creature list size (0-indexed, maximum 63).
4436 4439 (unknown Pointer to Creature)
443A 443A At least one monster defeated flag.
443B 443B Party fled combat flag.
443C 443C (unknown 8-bit)
443D 443D (unknown 8-bit)
443E 443E (unknown, always 0)
465C 465C Game initialization 2 loop index.
4660 4660 ITEMS file found flag.  (Not ever used.)
4661 468B Game directory copy for game initialiation 2.  This is copied from
          DS:547C, then DS:547C is erased, some initialization is done, then
          this copy gets copied back to DS:547C.
468C 470B ITEMS File variable.
470C 470C STING free training flag.
470D 470D (byte alignment)
470E 4711 Win game Pointer to image buffer.
4712 4712 Win game interface state backup.
4713 4715 Win game String buffer.
4716 4719 Temporary pointer 1 to creature.
471A 471D Temporary pointer 2 to creature.
471E 4765 Unknown creature Boolean array, 1-indexed; size 72, 1 byte
          each.  Believed to be related to effect timers.
4766 4769 Pointer to spell list String linked list.
476A 47A1 Spell list array, 0-indexed; size 56, 1 byte each.  (In some cases,
          the array size is 21; overlaps with the below in this case.)
477F 483E Spell scroll pointer array, 0-indexed; size 48, 4 bytes each.
          (Overlaps with the above.)
483F 4842 (unknown, unreferenced)
4843 4843 Spell list count of scroll spells.
4844 4844 Spellcasting temp variable 1.  (I have no idea why this is global.)
4845 4845 Spellcasting temp variable 2.  (Ditto.)
4846 4847 Creature equipped items encumbrance.
4848 484B Pointer to reserved graphical area.  Larger if Tandy graphics is
          chosen.  (I don't see the reason to store this, since the beginning
          of this space seems to be always identical to HeapEnd.)
484C 484C POOL.CFG single character read.
484D 494C POOL.CFG File variable, when reading.
494D 49CC POOL.CFG File variable, when checking that it exists.
49CD 49CD IOResult code checking for existence of POOL.CFG.
49CE 49CF IOResult code checking for existence of any other file.
49D0 49D0 (unknown; checked when out of memory but never defined)
49D1 49D1 Full intro flag (line 5 in POOL.CFG).
49D2 49D5 Pointer to Gold Box Virtual Machine zone 0 ($4900-$4CFF), bytes are
          16-bit.  To convert pointer addends to GBVM addresses, divide by 2
          then add $4900.
49D6 49D9 Pointer to Gold Box Virtual Machine zone 1 ($6B00-$6EFF), bytes are
          usually 16-bit (bytes here may be 8-bit on an address-by-address
          basis and depend on whether the VM is being read from or written to).
          To convert pointer addends to GBVM addresses, divide by 2 then add
          $6B00.
49DA 49DD Pointer to Gold Box Virtual Machine zone 2 ($9700-$98FF), bytes are
          16-bit.  To convert pointer addends to GBVM addresses, divide by 2
          then add $9700.
49DE 49E1 Pointer to ECL script aka Gold Box Virtual Machine zone 3 ($9900-
          $B6FF), bytes are 8-bit.
49E2 49E2 Delay (0...9).  Should be consistent with GBVM $49FC.
49E3 49E4 ECL script vm_run_1 GBVM address.
49E5 49E6 ECL script search_location GBVM address.
49E7 49E8 ECL script pre_camp_check GBVM address.
49E9 49EA ECL script camp_interrupted GBVM address.
49EB 49EC ECL script initial_entry GBVM address.
49ED 49EE ECL script instruction pointer (IP).  (Virtual pointer, not actual.)
49EF 49F2 (unknown, unreferenced)
49F3 49F3 Interface state:
            0 main menu (includes training hall)
            1 shop or temple
            2 camp
            3 moving outdoors
            4 moving indoors
            5 combat
            6 loot
            7 won game
49F4 49F4 Exit combat at end of round flag (unused).
49F5 49F5 Portraits setting flag.  Should be consistent with bit 1 of GBVM
          $49FF.
49F6 49F6 Monster pictures setting flag.  Should be consistent with bit 2 of
          GBVM $49FF.
49F7 49F7 STING hit point debugging flag (prints after draining if on).
49F8 49F8 Loaded saved game flag.
49F9 49F9 Party location type, previous (as below).
49FA 49FA Party location type, current:
            1 any 3D map
            2 Western Wilderness
            3 Central Wilderness
            4 Eastern Wilderness
49FB 49CD Uninterrupted resting time when disturbable, in ticks; resets to 0
          upon starting the game or when rolling for being disturbed.
49FD 49FD Current portrait head file ID (distinction vs. DS:6B00 unknown).
49FE 49FE Current portrait head file ID (distinction vs. DS:6B05 unknown).
49FF 49FF Party defeated flag.
4A00 4A00 Delay in printing message to message window flag
4A01 4A01 (byte alignment)
4A02 4A02 Register record AL.  (For Intr call; see TPv6LR, p. 80.)
4A03 4A03 Register record AH.
4A04 4A04 Register record BL.
4A05 4A05 Register record BH.
4A06 4A06 Register record CL.
4A07 4A07 Register record CH.
4A08 4A08 Register record DL.
4A09 4A09 Register record DH.
4A0A 4A0B Register record BP.
4A0C 4A0D Register record SI.
4A0E 4A0F Register record DI.
4A10 4A11 Register record DS.
4A12 4A13 Register record ES.
4A14 4A15 Register record FLAGS.
4A16 4A17 EGA video memory segment for currently displayed page.
4A18 4A19 EGA video memory segment for other page.  (SSI apparently planned to
          support multiple EGA pages, but never uses more than one.)
4A1A 4A1A Other EGA page number (always 0).
4A1B 4A1B Currently displayed EGA page number (always 0).
4A1C 4A1C Original video mode (from INT 10 AH 0F).
4A1D 4A1D Current video mode (from INT 10 AH 0F).
4A1E 4A1E Video mode (line 1 in POOL.CFG):
            0 CGA
            1 EGA
            2 Tandy
4A1F 4A1F (byte alignment)
4A20 4A23 Pointer to view image buffer (maximum 168x168 pixels); 168x168 pixels
          is the size of the combat map view.  Can be smaller.
4A24 4A27 Pointer to icon image buffer (24x24 pixels).
4A28 4ACF (unknown Boolean array, 0-indexed; size 168, 1 byte each)
4AD0 4C1F (unknown array, 0-indexed; size 168, 2 bytes each.  Believed to be
          an offset related to a view image buffer.)
4C20 4D6F (unknown array, 0-indexed; size 168, 2 bytes each.  Believed to be
          some kind of lower limit of a view image buffer.)
4D70 4EBF (unknown array, 0-indexed; size 168, 2 bytes each.  Believed to be
          some kind of upper limit of a view image buffer.)
4EC0 504F CGA graphics segment array by row, size 200.
5050 51DF EGA graphics offset array by row, size 200.
51E0 536F Tandy graphics segment array by row, size 200.
5370 5370 (unknown, always 1)
5371 5371 (byte alignment)
5372 5372 Current sound setting (line 5 of POOL.CFG):
            0 Tandy
            1 PC
            2 silent
5373 5373 Initial sound setting (as above, but only 0/1 possible).
5374 5375 (unknown uint16 sound variable)
5376 5376 Virtual disk number.  Should be consistent with GBVM $6E12.
5377 5377 Previous virtual disk number.
5378 5379 (unknown, always 1)
537A 5479 Save directory.  (Line 4 of POOL.CFG.  DS:537B is the save disk drive
          letter.)
547A 547B (unknown, always 1)
547C 557B Game directory.  (Line 3 of POOL.CFG.  DS:547D is the game disk drive
          letter.)
557C 557C Flag for suppressing insert disk prompt.
557D 557D Recently saved game flag.
557E 5581 Pointer to DAX compressed file.  Only valid in 0802:0716 call.
5582 5D81 ITEMS (without 2-byte header).
5D82 5D91 (unknown; most likely a spurious additional ITEMS entry)
5D92 5D95 Pointer to current creature.  Outside of combat, should be a
          character consistent with the value of GBVM $6DB1 and $6DB4.
5D96 5D99 Pointer to linked list of creatures.
5D9A 5D9D Unknown Pointer to item.
5E1E 5E1F ITEMS BlockRead Result.
5E20 5E23 Pointer to font.  Each entry in the font table is 8 bytes.
5E24 5E24 Current char column.  (Equivalent of WhereX.)
5E25 5E25 Current char row.  (Equivalent of WhereY.)
5E26 5E39 (unknown)
5E3A 5E4D Pointer to current 8x8 symbol sets array (8x8 image buffers); size 5,
          4 bytes each.
5E4E 5E51 Pointer to current 8x8 symbol image buffer.
5E52 5E55 Pointer to 2D map tile set image buffer 1.
5E56 5E59 Pointer to 2D map tile set image buffer 2.
5E5A 5F2F Icon animation array, 0-indexed; size 26, 8 bytes each (as pairs of
          Pointers to image buffers)
          By index (some of these overlap):
              0...7 CHEAD/CBODY (party, no overlap with anything else)
             8...11 CPIC 0...3 (transparency color 0)
             9...11 ICON 0...2 (transparency color 0)
            11...12 temporary working copies
            13...24 COMSPR 0...11 (transparency color 0)
                 25 COMSPR 25  (transparency color 0)
5F2A 5F2A Current size of creature pointer array at DS:65BD.
5F2B 604A Combat arena location array, 1-indexed; size 72, 4 bytes each.
604B 6092 Creature X-coordinate combat arena delta array, 1-indexed; size 72, 1
          byte each.
6093 60DA Creature Y-coordinate combat arena delta array, 1-indexed; size 72, 1
          byte each.
60DB 65BC Combat arena creature index 2D array, 0-indexed; size 50*25, 1 byte
          each.  Creatures that occupy more than 1 tile likewise occupy more
          than 1 in the 2D array.
65BD 66DC Creature Pointer array, 1-indexed; size 72, 4 bytes each.
66DD 6714 Combat downed character array, 1-indexed; size 8, 7 bytes each.
6715 6715 Size of array at DS:66DD.
6716 6719 Pointer to combat arena.
671A 671A Count of potential targets within range.
671B 67F2 Combat target data array, 1-indexed; size 72, 3 bytes each.
67F3 67F3 (byte alignment)
67F4 680F Treasure money array, 0-indexed (copper...jewelry); size 7, 4 bytes
          each.
6810 6813 Treasure pointer to items list.
6814 6815 Team count array by hostility, 0-indexed; size 2, 1 byte each.
6816 6816 Current saving throw.
6817 6817 Current effect ID to check.  (Set to 0 if check succeeds.)
6818 6818 Current damage.
6819 6819 Current element bitmask:
            bit 1 fire
            bit 2 cold
            bit 4 electricity
            bit 8 magic
            bit 16 acid
681A 681A Current attack *or* current movement times 2.
681B 681B Current spell being cast.
681C 681C Current damage dice.
681D 681D Current creature calculating movement flag.
681E 681E Current suppress targeting flag.
681F 681F Effect lock flag.  (Some effects do not trigger if this is on; this
          is a de facto synchronization mechanism, as effects are on timers.)
6820 6820 Current spell affects multiple targets flag.
6821 6821 Redraw inventory menu flag.
6822 6822 Current attack roll.
6823 6824 Current number of hits this round array (primary/secondary),
          1-indexed; size 2, 1 byte each.
6825 6825 Current morale.
6826 6829 Pointer to other creature that current creature is interacting with.
682A 682A Current saving throw type (0...4).
682B 682B (byte alignment)
682C 6A57 Effect function Pointer array, 1-indexed; size 139, 4 bytes each.
6A58 6A5B Pointer to 3D wall graphics.
6A5C 6A5F Pointer to 3D map.
6A60 6A60 Color of sky/ceiling (after mapping, uses standard 16-color palette).
6A61 6A61 (unknown 8-bit)
6A62 6A62 (unknown 8-bit)
6A63 6A63 (unknown 8-bit)
6AAC 6AAC Automap flag.
6AAD 6AAD GBVM $C04B (8-bit byte, current X-coordinate)
6AAE 6AAE GBVM $C04C (8-bit byte, current Y-coordinate)
6AAF 6AAF GBVM $C04D or $033D (8-bit byte, current facing; $C04D does not
          include NE/SE/SW/NW, $033D does)
6AB0 6AB0 GBVM $C04E (8-bit byte, current wall for square and facing)
6AB1 6AB1 GBVM $C04F (8-bit byte, current square event)
6AB2 6AB3 GBVM $4AF9 (16-bit byte, function unknown)
6AB4 6AB5 GBVM $4AFC (16-bit byte, function unknown)
6AB6 6AB7 GBVM $4AFA (16-bit byte, function unknown)
6AB8 6AB9 GBVM $4AFD (16-bit byte, function unknown)
6ABA 6ABB GBVM $4AFB (16-bit byte, function unknown)
6ABC 6ABD GBVM $4AFE (16-bit byte, function unknown)
6ABE 6AFF Animation data.
6B00 6B00 Current portrait head file ID (distinction vs. DS:49FD unknown).
6B01 6B04 Current portrait head image buffer pointer.
6B05 6B05 Current portrait body file ID (distinction vs. DS:49FE unknown).
6B06 6B09 Current portrait body image buffer pointer.
6B0A 6B12 Current picture archive file name ("PIC", "FINAL", or "SPRIT").
6B13 6B1B (unknown; likely extra space for above String)
6B1C 6B1C Current picture archive file ID.
6B29 6B2A Vertical menu index.
6B2B 6B2B Current horizontal menu choice (1-indexed)
6B2C 6B2C Extended scan code flag.  (Not actually used.)
6B80 6B83 Pointer to current scroll.  (Not necessarily actually a scroll.)
6B84 6C93 Spell function Pointer array, 0-indexed; size 68, 4 bytes each.
6C94 6C94 Number of targeted creatures
6C95 6DB4 Target creature Pointer array, 1-indexed; size 72, 4 bytes each.
6DB5 6DB8 (unknown Pointer to Creature)
6DB9 6DB9 Target X-coordinate in combat arena (0...49).
6DBA 6DBA Target Y-coordinate in combat arena (0...24).
6DBB 6DBE Pointer to linked list of Stinking Clouds.
6DBF 6DBF Using item flag.
6DC0 6DC0 Treasure money flag.
6DC1 6DC1 (byte alignment)
6DC2 6DCF Resting time as GBVM clock array, 0-indexed; size 7, 2 bytes each.
6DD0 6DD7 Spell preparation time in ticks array; size 8, 1 byte each.
6DD8 6DD9 Resting time this day in ticks (5 minutes), resets to 0 at 288.
6DDA 6DDA Flag to suppress drawing border around window message.
6DDB 6DDB (byte alignment)
6DDC 6DDC (unknown)
6DDD 6DDD (byte alignment)
6DDE 6DE0 Door opening Boolean array, 0-indexed (0 = bash, 1 = pick,
          2 = knock); size 3, 1 byte each.
6DE1 6DE1 (byte alignment)
6DE2 6DE2 (unknown, always 1)
6DE3 6DE3 Combat round counter, 0-indexed.
6DE4 6DE4 (unknown, unreferenced)
6DE5 6E2C Potential target creature index array, 1-indexed; size 72, 1 byte
          each.
6E2D 6E2E Current number of attacks made array (primary/secondary), 1-indexed;
          size 2, 1 byte each.
6E2F 6E2F Hostile creature hit points percent remaining.
6E30 6E30 Quick combat magic flag.  (Toggled by Alt-M.)
6E31 6E31 Current creature done this round flag.
6E32 6E35 (unknown, unreferenced)
6E36 6E39 (unknown Pointer to image buffer)
6F68 6F68 GBVM $C059 (8-bit byte, function unknown)
6F69 6F69 GBVM $C05F (8-bit byte, function unknown)
6F6A 6F6B GBVM $00FB (16-bit byte, function unknown)
6F6C 6F6D GBVM $00FC (16-bit byte, function unknown)
6F6E 6F6F GBVM $00B1 (16-bit byte, function unknown)
6F70 6F73 Pointer to ECL stack top function return GBVM address.
6F74 6F77 Pointer to ECL stack second-from-top function return GBVM address.
6F78 6F78 Result of ECL COMPARE, equality.
6F79 6F79 Result of ECL COMPARE, inequality.
6F7A 6F7A Result of ECL COMPARE, less than.
6F7B 6F7B Result of ECL COMPARE, greater than.
6F7C 6F7C Result of ECL COMPARE, less than or equal.
6F7D 6F7D Result of ECL COMPARE, greater than or equal.
6F7E 6F7E Previous ECL opcode.  (Never referenced othgerwise.)
6F7F 6F7F Current ECL opcode.
6F80 6F80 (unknown, unreferenced)
6F81 6F81 Current monster ID.
6F82 6F82 Current monster picture ID.
6F83 6F83 Current icon animation index (0...7 for party, 8+ for other).
7006 7045 GBVM temp variable type array, 1-indexed; size 64, 1 byte each.
7046 7085 GBVM temp variable upper byte array, 1-indexed; size 64, 1 byte each.
7086 70C5 GBVM temp variable lower byte array, 1-indexed; size 64, 1 byte each.
70C6 70C6 (unknown; used only for bronze dragon breath attack)
70C7 70C7 Current picture number of animation frames (max 8).
70C8 ???? GBVM string value array, 1-indexed; size unknown (must be at least 5
          to accommodate vertical menu; maximum 20), 256 bytes each.
84C8 84C9 Unknown monster picture/sprite Boolean array; size 2, 1 byte each.
84CA 84CB (unknown, unreferenced)
84CC 84CD GBVM $03DE (16-bit byte, sound effect)
84CE 84CF GBVM $00B8 (16-bit byte, function unknown)
84D0 84D1 GBVM $00B9 (16-bit byte, function unknown)
84D2 84D2 Dump creature with ECL LOAD CHARACTER for GBVM $6C00 flag.
84D3 84D3 Dump creature with ECL LOAD CHARACTER for GBVM $6B00 flag.
84D4 84D4 Duel flag.
84D5 84D5 Count of characters who are not Animated after combat.
84D6 84D9 Share of experience after combat (before stat or multiclass adjust).
84DA 84DA Combat won flag.
84DB 84DB (byte alignment)
84DC 84DC ECL script ID.
84DD 84DD Search mode flag.  Backup of GBVM $6DCA, which is transiently set
          during a "L"ook command.
84DE 84DE ECL 3D CLEAR BOX executed flag.
84DF 84DF (unknown, set by ECL opcode 3C PROTECTION)
84E0 84E0 ECL currently displaying graphics flag.
84E1 84E1 (unknown)
84E2 84E2 (unknown, set by ECL opcode 3C PROTECTION)
84E3 84E3 ECL displaying monster sprite flag.
84E4 84E4 (unknown)
84E5 84E5 ECL write to GBVM $C059 or $C05F flag.
84E6 84E6 ECL write moved party flag.
84E7 84E7 Creature list contains hostile monsters flag.
84E8 84E8 Redraw sky/ceiling in 3D view flag.
84E9 84E9 Currently in ECL opcode 29 ENCOUNTER MENU flag.
84EA 84EA Copy of GBVM $6DE1.
84EB 84EF (unknown, unreferenced)
84F0 84F0 CheckBreak.  (TPv6PG, p. 203.  Default is 1, set to 0 by SSI.)
84F1 84F1 CheckEof.  (TPv6PG, p. 203.)
84F2 84F2 DirectVideo.  (TPv6PG, p. 203.)
84F3 84F3 CheckSnow.  (TPv6PG, p. 203.)
84F4 84F5 LastMode.  (TPv6PG, p. 204.)
84F6 84F6 TextAttr.  (TPv6PG, p. 204.)
84F7 84F7 (byte alignment)
84F8 84F9 WindMin.  (TPv6PG, p. 205.)
84FA 84FB WindMax.  (TPv6PG, p. 205.)
84FC 84FD Empty loop speed measurement; used in Turbo Pascal Delay procedure.
84FE 84FF Default and largest possible WindMax (in same format as WindMax).
8500 8500 Backup value of TextAttr.
8501 8501 Internal char buffer for ReadKey.
8502 8502 Flag for Ctrl-Break pressed.
8503 8503 (byte alignment)
8504 8507 OvrReadBuf (TPv6PG, p. 175.)
8508 8607 Input console text File variable.  (TPv6PG, p. 131.)
8608 8707 Output console text File variable.  (TPv6PG, p. 131.)
8708 870B SaveInt00.  (For all of the SaveInt Pointers, see TPv6PG, p. 139.
          These never get used during gameplay; their only use is to restore
          pre-startup DOS conditions.)
870C 870F SaveInt02.
8710 8713 SaveInt1B.
8714 8717 SaveInt21.
8718 871B SaveInt23.
871C 871F SaveInt24.
8720 8723 SaveInt34.
8724 8727 SaveInt35.
8728 872B SaveInt36.
872C 872F SaveInt37.
8730 8733 SaveInt38.
8734 8737 SaveInt39.
8738 873B SaveInt3A.
873C 873F SaveInt3B.
8740 8743 SaveInt3C.
8744 8747 SaveInt3D.
8748 874B SaveInt3E.
874C 874F SaveInt3F.
8750 8753 SaveInt75.
8754 8755 GetMem number of bytes to reserve.
8756 875F (segment byte alignment; end of DS, followed by SS)

SECTION 12.6.5 - Code Hacking
-----------------------------

This section mostly presumes you are modifying v1.3.  All of these changes are
straightforward and small, but none have been truly tested; experiment at your
own risk.  The intent here is as much to demonstrate how to make changes as to
actually suggest them.

Any disassembly is from IDA Pro and uses its conventions.  Locations vary with
game version; the listed ones are for v1.3 unless otherwise specified.

Removing the copy protection
  This should work for any version:

  ; GAME.OVR in 197F:00FD copy protection
    1E                push    ds
    57                push    di
  ; The below xx xx xx xx varies with version (string comparison library call):
  ;    24 07 2E 0C in v1.2
  ;    10 0C F8 0A in v1.3
    9A xx xx xx xx    call    sub_BB90
    75 02             jnz     short loc_19B20
  ; ^^^^^ GOG patch: replace with 90 90 (nop / nop)
  ;        my patch: replace with 74 02 (jz short loc_19B20)
    EB 25             jmp     short loc_19B45

  If you have a version for which the above does not work (this solution is
  inelegant but always works):
  (1) Open START.EXE or ST.EXE, whichever you have
  (2) Search for this text string: "BEWARE"
  (3) Replace this text and all subsequent 6-letter code words with "XXXXXX"
      (or any other all-capitals 6-letter string of your choice).  There should
      be 13 of these, with the last one being "WYVERN".
  You can now enter your 6-letter string instead of having to use the code
  wheel.

  Any of these fixes should precisely preserve original game behavior, which
  then-contemporary cracks often do not; completely suppressing any randomized
  documentation question changes RNG seeding.  That only matters for either
  in-depth analysis like this, or stunt runs and speed runs.  (It's good to
  know that GOG does it properly.)

  My change to GOG's patch only matters if you want to see what happens if you
  enter a wrong answer, by entering a correct answer.  That doesn't really
  matter here, but it does in games which have entertaining responses to copy
  protection failures, like Curse of the Azure Bonds.

Paralysis spell saving throw fixes
  To make the three paralysis spells use the correct saving throws:

  ; START.EXE in DS:320A spell array
  ; Change 1: change cleric Hold Person to save vs. paralysis
    00 02 06 00 04 01 06 00 01 04 34 01 05 07 01 00
  ;                            ^^ change 04 to 00

  ; Change 2: change magic-user Hold Person to save vs. paralysis
    01 03 0C 00 00 02 07 00 01 04 34 01 03 06 01 00
  ;                            ^^ change 04 to 00

  ; Change 3: change Wand of Paralyzation to save vs. rod/staff/wand
    02 06 06 00 00 00 04 00 01 00 34 01 00 07 01 00
  ;                            ^^ change 00 to 02

  This won't fix the Wand of Fireballs or Wand of Lightning Bolt.

ECL opcode 23 SURPRISE fix
  To apply surprise modifiers correctly:

  ; GAME.OVR in 19B5:16C9 ECL opcode 23 SURPRISE
    8A 46 F8          mov     al, [bp+var_8]
    30 E4             xor     ah, ah
    8B D0             mov     dx, ax
    8A 46 FB          mov     al, [bp+var_5]
  ;       ^^ change to FA (mov al, [bp+var_6])
    30 E4             xor     ah, ah
    40                inc     ax
    40                inc     ax
    2B C2             sub     ax, dx
    88 46 F7          mov     [bp+var_9], al
    8A 46 FA          mov     al, [bp+var_6]
  ;       ^^ change to FB (mov al, [bp+var_5])
    30 E4             xor     ah, ah
    8B D0             mov     dx, ax

ECL opcode 34 ECL CLOCK fix
  This should make time pass properly (in minutes, up to 255), if you change
  a script to add this opcode (this will have no effect otherwise):

  ; GAME.OVR in 19B5:2AC1 ECL opcode 34 ECL CLOCK
    B0 01             mov     al, 1
    50                push    ax
    9A 2A 00 2B 00    call    sub_2DA
    8A 46 FF          mov     al, [bp+var_1]
  ; ^^^^^^^^ change to B0 01 90 (mov al, 1 / nop); var_1 is not initialized
    50                push    ax
    9A 25 00 2B 00    call    sub_2D5

ECL opcode 3B SPELL fix
  This doesn't work because GBVM addresses are cast to uint8.  To fix in the
  one place where this opcode gets used:

  ; GAME.OVR in 19B5:2C03 ECL opcode 3B SPELL
  ; Change #1: read GBVM addresses correctly
    55                push    bp
    89 E5             mov     bp, sp
    83 EC 0A          sub     sp, 0Ah
  ;       ^^ change to 0C (to reserve 2 extra bytes on the stack)
    B0 03             mov     al, 3
    50                push    ax
    9A 2A 00 2B 00    call    sub_2DA
    B0 01             mov     al, 1
    50                push    ax
    9A 25 00 2B 00    call    sub_2D5
    88 46 FF          mov     [bp+var_1], al
    A0 87 70          mov     al, byte_13846+1
    50                push    ax
    A0 47 70          mov     al, byte_13806+1
    50                push    ax
    9A 4D 00 2B 00    call    sub_2FD
    88 46 F7          mov     [bp+var_9], al
  ; ^^^^^^^^ change to 89 46 F6 (mov [bp+var_A], ax)
    A0 88 70          mov     al, byte_13846+2
    50                push    ax
    A0 48 70          mov     al, byte_13806+2
    50                push    ax
    9A 4D 00 2B 00    call    sub_2FD
    88 46 F6          mov     [bp+var_A], al
  ; ^^^^^^^^ change to 89 46 F4 (mov [bp+var_C], ax)

  ; Change #2: write to GBVM addresses correctly
    8A 46 F7          mov     al, [bp+var_9]
  ; ^^^^^^^^ change to 8B 46 F6 (mov ax, [bp+var_A])
    30 E4             xor     ah, ah
  ; ^^^^^ change all to 90 (nop)
    50                push    ax
    8A 46 FE          mov     al, [bp+var_2]
    30 E4             xor     ah, ah
    50                push    ax
    9A 52 00 2B 00    call    sub_302
    8A 46 F6          mov     al, [bp+var_A]
  ; ^^^^^^^^ change to 8B 46 F4 (mov ax, [bp+var_C])
    30 E4             xor     ah, ah
  ; ^^^^^ change all to 90 (nop)
    50                push    ax
    8A 46 FD          mov     al, [bp+var_3]
    30 E4             xor     ah, ah
    50                push    ax
    9A 52 00 2B 00    call    sub_302

Mirror Image fix
  The Mirror Image effect handler checks that a spell is being cast before it
  will function, which is neither how it works in Gold Box games beginning with
  Secret of the Silver Blades, nor is that what the PHB says should happen.  To
  remove this check:

  ; GAME.OVR in 2715:09C0 Mirror Image effect handler
    3C 01             cmp     al, 1
    76 5A             jbe     short loc_27B87
    80 3E 1B 68 00    cmp     byte_12FDB, 0
  ; ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ change all to 90 (nop)
    76 53             jbe     short loc_27B87
  ; ^^^^^ change all to 90 (nop)
    80 3E 20 68 00    cmp     byte_12FE0, 0
    75 4C             jnz     short loc_27B87

Spellcasting delay patch
  Spellcasting delay is more than three times that of tabletop version.  If you
  want to change spellcasting time to be more true to the original rules (this
  will significantly affect game balance, as the balancing features of weapon
  speed delays and additional wands/scrolls/potions aren't present):

  ; GAME.OVR in 2AA0:2414 combat cast spell
    30 E4             xor     ah, ah
    99                cwd
    B9 03 00          mov     cx, 3
  ;    ^^ change 03 to 01 (or whatever other divisor you prefer)
    F7 F1             div     cx

Random item generation fixes
  To fix some of the gibberish items you can get with random items:

  ; GAME.OVR in 3C1F:1010 generate random item
  ; Change #1: fix for Javelin of Lightning
    88 46 FF          mov     [bp+var_1], al
    80 7E FF 05       cmp     byte ptr [bp+var_1], 5
    75 04             jnz     short loc_3D2C9
    C6 46 FC 90       mov     byte ptr [bp+var_4], 90h
  ;          ^^ change 90 to 69 (105 = Javelin of Lightning)

  ; Change #2: fix for Wand of Lightning
    B0 01             mov     al, 1
    50                push    ax
    B0 03             mov     al, 3
    50                push    ax
    9A 48 00 B0 00    call    sub_B48
    30 E4             xor     ah, ah
    40                inc     ax
  ; ^^ change 40 to 90 (nop); changes 1d3+1 to 1d3
    88 46 FF          mov     [bp+var_1], al
    8A 46 FF          mov     al, [bp+var_1]

  ; Change #3: fix for potion generation
    3C 47             cmp     al, 47h
    75 41             jnz     short loc_3D9CC
    B0 01             mov     al, 1
    50                push    ax
    B0 0B             mov     al, 0Bh
  ;    ^^ change 0B to 0A; changes 1d11 to 1d10
    50                push    ax
    9A 48 00 B0 00    call    sub_B48

  This won't fix the blank items you sometimes get, or enable Gauntlets of Ogre
  Power as a random item.


SECTION 13.1 - Technical Bugs
-----------------------------

There is no sharp line between a "technical" bug and an "adaptational" bug;
just wanted to split up the list somehow.

* There are numerous timer bugs where real-life midnight resetting the clock
  is not accounted for.  Often, pressing a key will resume normal behavior, but
  you may need to restart the game.  (This is common in DOS games of the era.
  You often can't use timer interrupts to avoid this, if those are tied up
  handling sound.  You *can* check the date, but that typically isn't done.)
* Exiting creating a character before the character is fully created causes a
  memory leak.  (This is the only memory leak I've found.)
* The game may crash if you try to create a character with too many chars
  that are invalid in a DOS filename (like "....").
* You can manually lower statistics below their defined minima.
* Strength 19...25 do not allow you to bash down an easy-to-bash door.
* Constitution is only properly defined from 3...20 (and only behaves correctly
  from 4...18).
* Constitution hit point bonuses are not properly calculated for multi-classed
  characters after level 1.
* Any Constitution saving throw bonus versus poison also applies to
  paralyzation/death.
* A character under the effect of Haste or Slow has movement adjusted in the
  wrong direction when viewing the character (actual movement is correct).
* The passage of time does not actually age your characters, until after 256
  years have elapsed; then you age by 1 year every minute.
* Dwarves do not get a to-hit bonus against GOBLIN GUARD (#2), HOBGOBLIN LDR
  (#7), or GRISHNAK (#28).
* Elves do not get a to-hit bonus with a Fine Composite Long Bow.
* Gnomes do not get a to-hit bonus against GOBLIN GUARD (#2).
* Single-target damage spells should not be able to raise the dead.
* Thieving abilities are not necessarily adjusted promptly.
* Charm effect removal may not properly restore a hired NPC.
* Dispel Magic does not (and cannot) check against effect caster level if that
  is not remembered.
* The Shield spell does not protect against a Wand of Magic Missiles.
* Mirror Image does not work against physical attacks, only targeted spells.
  (Fixed in Secret of the Silver Blades.)
* When manipulating coins, coins with a total value above 65535 gold (13107
  platinum) may be lost during a transaction.
* If you sell anything in gold value, it gets converted to platinum and
  rounded down; any gold remainder is lost.
* A Bag of Holding won't cleanly allow you to pick up all the weight you can.
* A Flame Tongue sword has no special effect.  (Fixed in Curse of the Azure
  Bonds.)
* Keoghtum's Ointment should not convert poisoned characters to dead.
* The Manual of Bodily Health attempts to adjust hit points, but doesn't do so
  correctly, in multiple ways.
* A random Sling shouldn't weigh 8 pounds.
* The Wand of Fireballs and Wand of Lightning Bolt require targets to save vs.
  spell, not rod/staff/wand.
* The acid squirt attack of the AHNKHEG (#65) isn't properly marked as
  acid damage.
* GENHEERIS (#88) is unable to memorize spells.
* ACOLYTE (#108) has a race of Monster (so some magic won't work as expected),
  and has 0 XP, which allows the NPC to be "M"odified, which causes
  array-out-of-bounds errors.
* The MUMMY (#114) vulnerability to magical fire is coded as magical *or* fire.
* ECL opcode 22 PARTY SURPRISE doesn't do anything special with no ranger in
  the party.  Even if you do, it doesn't set one of the surprise variables
  properly.
* ECL opcode 23 SURPRISE does not apply the surprise modifiers properly.
* ECL opcode 28 ROB does not correctly restore item chance during iteration of
  a character's inventory.
* ECL opcode 3B SPELL was improperly coded and will never do anything.

SECTION 13.2 - Scripting Bugs
-----------------------------

This doesn't include spelling or grammar errors, which are numerous.

* Civilized Area: you may rest in an inn, even if you have angered Phlan and
  you are told you aren't allowed to.
* Civilized Area: the shop door at (9,14) works at night.
* Slums: the game doesn't properly check the random encounter counter while
  resting, but credits you with a clear point for defeating monsters that
  appear when disturbed, allowing you to clear the block without dealing with
  all set encounters.
* Slums: for set encounters, the game doesn't first check to see if you ran
  away from combat before crediting you with victory.  (This is a common
  scripting error in the Gold Box games.)
* Kuto's Well: if rest is interrupted by monsters, they will be surprised.
* Podal Plaza: there is supposed to be a difference in resting between being on
  mission and not clearing the block, but the latter immediately clobbers the
  former, so it doesn't actually happen.
* Podal Plaza: in a random encounter, running away is only checked for after
  you have been credited with victory.
* Podal Plaza: you can defeat the buccaneer and take his treasure twice.
* Cadorna Textile House: in a random encounter, running away is only checked
  for after you have been credited with victory.
* Cadorna Textile House: rest can be disturbed even if it is safe.
* Cadorna Textile House: the Ring of Feather Falling does not prevent fall
  damage in the well.
* Cadorna Textile House: Restal can open the Cadorna family treasure more than
  once.
* Kovel Mansion: the number of thieves in the location 14 ambush is not
  properly calculated.
* Wealthy Area: you have only one chance to find the treasure at location 4.
* Wealthy Area: going south from (4,15) causes a crash.
* Yarash's Pyramid: completing and leaving the pyramid can incorrectly flag
  the endgame scripts.
* Nomad Camp: the Shaman carries a "Bracers AC 2" that is actually AC 4.
* Lizardman Keep: if you give an incorrect friend-word, the combats at
  locations 3 and 10 aren't correct.
* Lizardman Keep: the count of giant lizards doesn't work correctly.
* Buccaneer Base: you can get the heir to Bivant even if you already have him.
* Zhentil Keep Outpost: you can have dinner with the commandant even if you've
  already fought some of the guards.
* Zhentil Keep Outpost: you aren't supposed to be able to leave the outpost
  from your room before dinner without encountering the commandant.
* Zhentil Keep Outpost: you aren't supposed to fight Al-Hyam Dazid here.
* Valhingen Graveyard: the treasure of locations 12 and 24 are transposed.
* Stojanow Gate: the bugbears become outright hostile if you refuse to pass
  through the gate (they should probably just become more suspicious).
* Stojanow Gate: the bugbears should always become hostile if they believe you
  to be impostors.
* Stojanow Gate: setting off the alarm here should start random encounters and
  alert the tower guards, but it doesn't.
* Stojanow Gate: confronting the tower guards after defeating the bugbear
  patrol has you fight both sets of tower guards, even if you have already
  defeated one set.
* Stojanow Gate: fleeing the bugbear patrol after fighting the tower guards
  crashes the game.
* Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze: at the false Tyranthraxus, the logic for
  "P"arleying with an "A"busive attitude is backwards.
* Valjevo Castle Inner Tower: the game script does not properly flag
  Tyranthraxus as defeated.

SECTION 13.3 - Adaptational Bugs
--------------------------------

This only considers adaptational errors that would be relatively easy to fix.
The game does correctly enforce some rather obscure rules; even so, I'm
excluding many difficult to enforce rules from the below.

* Minimum statistics required for a class are not fully enforced.  (For
  example, for classes available in any Gold Box game, Charisma 6 should be
  required.)
* No aging penalties are applied to statistics (even though some code exists
  for this).
* No death from old age (even though some code exists for this).
* No Intelligence roll is required to learn a magic-user spell.
* No clerical spell failure for Wisdom below 13.
* Dexterity 10 Pick Pocket adjustment should be -10%, not -19%.
* Dexterity 16 Open Locks adjustment should be +5%, not -5%.
* In cases where you lose a Dexterity bonus to Armor Class, you lose even
  penalties.
* Clerics should not be allowed to be True Neutral.
* Thieves are not required to refrain from using shields to act as a thief.
* Being blind should cause you to treat all creatures as invisible.
* Hold Person should require a saving throw vs. paralyzation, not vs. spell.
* Spiritual Hammer always has a flat +1 magical bonus; it should strike as a
  magical hammer for vulnerability purposes, but otherwise with no bonus.
* Animate Dead is far more powerful than it is supposed to be; it animates
  the dead with full hit points at significant range.
* Cause Disease does not last indefinitely, but instead 1d6 * 10 minutes, which
  should instead be the time of onset.
* Raise Dead: (1) has no chance of failure (fixed in Secret of the Silver
  Blades); (2) should not work on elves.
* Enlarge should grant slightly lower Strength at level 1 and 2.
* Reduce should do more than just dispel Enlarge.
* Shield provides a fixed, not varied, AC.
* Ray of Enfeeblement reduces damage by 25%; it does not reduce damage by an
  additional 2%/level.
* Haste and Slow do not affect initiative as they should.
* Protection from Normal Missiles should also mitigate damage from magical
  thrown and launched weaponry.
* A bec de corbin should either bash or pierce, not slash.
* A military fork, ranseur, or trident should pierce, not slash.
* A Cloak of Displacement should also grant a saving throw bonus.  (Any found
  as random treasure actually do, but non-random ones do not.)
* The Cloak of Elvenkind should check for whether its wearer is outside.
* Padded armor allows base movement 12, not 9 as in tabletop.
* Magical armor never provides a saving throw bonus.
* A Ring of Protection rarely adds its bonus to saving throws.
* A Wand of Paralyzation should permit a save vs. rod/staff/wand, not
  paralyzation.
* A monster equipping an item should receive any effects it grants.
* A monster equipping armor should have its movement reduced appropriately.
* LARGE SCORPION (#18) and HUGE SCORPION (#39) should not be snakes.
* TROLL (#31) should not be able to return from the dead after taking fire or
  acid damage.  (Fixed in Curse of the Azure Bonds; it only works here if *all*
  damage is fire/acid.)
* DISPLACER BEAST (#68) should be displaced.
* DISPLACER BEAST (#68) should not be lawful good.
* DRIDER (#69) does not penalize the saving throw vs. paralyzation.
* EFREETI (#70 and #124) does not know how to cast Enlarge or Invisibility.
* The MUMMY (#114) fear aura saving throw is supposed to consider the ratio of
  opponents to mummies, not just the number of opponents.

SECTION 13.4 - Strange Programming Decisions
--------------------------------------------

Points are only put here if I know it's on SSI's end.  Many problems are the
compiler's fault, others of the Pascal programming language; this is running
long enough as it is without getting into those.

* Strings should not usually be passed by value, if your hardware is limited.
  The syntactic distinction is (using C++ for comparison):
                   pass by value     pass by reference
  C++              (string S)        (string &S)     // with #include <string>
  Turbo Pascal     (S: string)       (var S: string)
* Effect and Creature probably shouldn't be stored as linked lists in
  dynamically allocated heap memory; that has serious overhead costs.
* Much the same applies to allocating combat information separately.
* Some variables that are only briefly needed are defined as global variables.
  Several are File variables; those take significant space.  (Many global
  variables are defensible in general; you'd otherwise need a lot more
  indirection or many more stack variables, which is costly on older
  architecture.)
* Some functions are identical, or very nearly so (e.g. there are multiple
  functions to input a number).
* The constantly used function that gets keystrokes does a String comparison to
  check for STING on every single keypress, which could be done once ever.
* I think it's perfectly defensible to roll your own graphics routines; you had
  to anyway if you were ever commercially releasing a game using Turbo Pascal.
  But after SSI makes the sensible decision to commit to a graphics mode during
  initialization, the game then loads a bunch of machine code and data for the
  other two modes anyway that will never get used.  You get better performance
  with a single dedicated graphics driver, taking up less memory.
* SSI apparently planned on using multiple EGA pages, but only ended up using
  one.  That's fine, there were clearly many things planned but never put in
  ... but the resulting code performs many EGA writes to that one page twice
  for no reason.  That's especially awkward since EGA already requires four
  writes to display one row of pixels.  This is likely the biggest contributor
  to text being printed so slowly compared to later Gold Box games.
* Why are some bytes in the GBVM 16-bit and others 8-bit?  That might be partly
  defensible, except it matters both what you are accessing and how (whether
  you are reading or writing, what you are writing, etc.)  That inconsistency
  I'd expect to cause trouble both fixing bugs and adapting the engine to later
  games.

SECTION 14.1 - Journal Entries
------------------------------

Here is a list of Journal Entries actually referenced by the game, with where
to find them (along with what you need to do to get it if it is not automatic).
Note that information in these entries is not guaranteed to be true.

 3 - Sokal Keep 16 (speak correctly to the keep's spectral defenders)
 7 - Mendor's Library 2 (search Philosophy section)
 8 - Mendor's Library 4 (search History section)
10 - Mendor's Library 18 (accept kobolds' surrender)
11 - Cadorna Textile House 23
14 - Kovel Mansion 10 (open cabinet A)
16 - Kobold Caves 14
19 - Mendor's Library 2 (search Philosophy section)
20 - Kobold Caves 18 (give water to crippled kobold)
21 - Mendor's Library 4 (search History section)
23 - Kovel Mansion 10 (open cabinet A)
25 - Temple of Bane (defeat Mace)
26 - Yarash's Pyramid Level 1 13 (search remains)
27 - Yarash's Pyramid Level 3 27 (search Yarash's desk)
28 - Kobold Caves 13
29 - Kovel Mansion 20
30 - Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze 1 (threaten Al-Hyam Dazid until he offers notes)
31 - Lizardman Keep (give proper tribal friend-word to old lizardman)
33 - Yarash's Pyramid Level 3 27 (search Yarash's desk)
35 - Yarash's Pyramid Level 3 24 (befriend and free enslaved lizardmen)
37 - Mendor's Library 4 (search History section)
38 - Kovel Mansion 17
40 - Yarash's Pyramid Level 3 27 (search Yarash's desk)
41 - Kovel Mansion 19
42 - Kobold Caves 2 (search mine tailings)
43 - Valhingen Graveyard 25 (read scroll)
46 - Zhentil Keep Outpost 6 (over dinner, discuss "M"agic -> "M"ention Pool)
47 - Cadorna Textile House 17
48 - Kovel Mansion 18 (defeat thieves)
49 - Yarash's Pyramid Level 3 27 (search Yarash's desk)
50 - Kuto's Well Catacombs 12 (defeat Norris the Gray)
51 - Kovel Mansion 17
53 - Wealthy Area 6 (defeat ogre/orc guards)
55 - Nomad Camp (accept nomads' invitation)
56 - Yarash's Pyramid Level 3 27 (search Yarash's desk)
57 - Sokal Keep 9 (defeat the orc/hobgoblin ambush)

Entries 4 (map to the silver dragon's cave) and 15 (a not-quite-precise map of
the southeastern Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze) are useful, but are not referenced
anywhere in the game.

SECTION 14.2 - Novelization
---------------------------

The party that undertakes the quest in the novel is:

Shal (human female fighter/magic-user)
Tarl (human male fighter/cleric)
Ren (human male ranger/thief)

They are multi-classed and equipped with very powerful magical items for low
level characters to make up for the fact that there are only ever three of
them.  Yes, that's the same Shal that later shows up in Pools of Darkness, the
game.  The three are also the main characters in Pools of Darkness, the
novelization.

Tavern brawls are even deadlier in the novel than in the Gold Box games!

Only the following quests are depicted: Sokal Keep; Cadorna Textile House;
Yarash's Pyramid; Valhingen Graveyard; Valjevo Castle Hedge Maze and Inner
Tower.

The Gold Box version, the tabletop version, and the novelization are all
independent of each other.  This is not true for Curse of the Azure Bonds or
Pools of Darkness.

SECTION 14.3 - Historical Accuracy
----------------------------------

Yes, I know, no one is seriously going to think this game is realistic, but I
like to talk about this.  Besides, Pool of Radiance and Curse of the Azure
Bonds (though not the later Gold Box games) were clearly written by people who
knew lots of historical detail, and who am I not to acknowledge that?

* Standard D&D 1E has a technology level of AD 1400 plus or minus 15 years,
  without the gunpowder weapons that existed at the time.  Even 1420 starts to
  have technology beyond what is supposed to exist; 1440 is right out, as
  that's about when Gutenberg introduced his printing press (though these do
  exist far away from the Moonsea region).  Gunpowder (which doesn't work in
  the Forgotten Realms) also starts to have a significant effect as the 15th
  century progresses: cannon played a significant role in the siege of Orleans
  (late 1420s), and a decisive one in the fall of Constantinople (1453).
  Firearms take several more decades to become significant, starting around the
  Battle of Cerignola (1503).

  Later D&D editions tend not to care about historical accuracy as much as
  1E/2E.  The reason for this is partly the last point on this list, and partly
  because most people would perceive a realistic treatment as unrealistic --
  they actually expect a fake version of history, as the standard fantasy
  setting contains numerous elements from the modern era.

* Werner von Urslingen was an actual historical character, known for leading a
  fearsome mercenary army in the 14th century.

* Bishop Braccio is likely meant to suggest Braccio da Montone, who was a
  military commander in the early 15th century.  (I don't believe he was a
  clergyman.)

* Porphyrys Cadorna is likely meant to suggest Luigi Cadorna, the terrible
  Italian World War I general.  "Terrible": I think George "at least I'm not as
  awful as Daniel Sickles" McClellan could general circles around Cadorna.

* Valjevo is the name of a good-sized city in Serbia.  (I don't believe it has
  any significant surviving fortress like Stirling Castle or the Red Fort.)

* The entire conception of several-on-several organic fair combat isn't
  particularly realistic.  Even if you set aside the questions of "should I
  fight those guys at all" and "how do I know those are actually the people I
  want to fight", you don't want a fair fight.  You structure everything around
  getting the jump on your enemy, and not getting jumped: avoid a fair fight to
  begin with.

  You can in principle build games around this.  However, that makes your game
  hinge more upon jumping the other side than actual combat, so D&D generally
  doesn't do more than a few perfunctory modifiers to some simple dice rolls.
  That causes problems for decent gameplay (it's much worse in earlier Wizardry
  than here), as fairness now hinges upon those rolls.  That kind of realism
  has thus typically been abandoned these days (to a significant extent even in
  any later Gold Box game).

  Arranged several-on-several combat, such as gladiatorial combat, trial by
  combat, or duels, can work, but that also mostly goes against the traditional
  D&D combat model.  The relative importance of duels in Pool of Radiance
  compared to later Gold Box games may have been another attempt at realism.

  This problem tapers off if combat is at least around battalion-scale, but I
  have never heard of a single-player RPG of such scale where you can control
  individual combatants.  Surprise is often a major factor even at larger
  scales; my standard examples are the Battle of Lake Trasimene (217 BC) and
  the Battle of Okehazama (1560).

* A single gold piece is actually a lot of money.  A precise conversion to
  present-day currency isn't possible (this also applies in real life if more
  than a few decades have passed), but at any point in time it's very roughly
  equivalent in value to a decent set of formal clothing, today perhaps several
  hundred USD/Euro.  So if you're paying 1 platinum piece for a room, that's a
  few thousand USD/Euro.  Even with the inflated prices a frontier economy
  would be expected to have, that's probably too high (for realism purposes;
  it's fine for gameplay, as you don't have to maintain food stocks).

  Trying to convert in-game weight to spot gold prices gives a much higher
  value, but that only reflects how D&D 1E doesn't understand how much actual
  coins weigh.  Gary Gygax clearly did not just weigh, say, an actual denarius,
  or Roman silver piece, which is not hard to come by compared to an actual
  aureus, or Roman gold piece.

  Also, gold is currently worth significantly more than platinum.

* Melee weapons are far lighter in real life than they are in D&D 1E, and many
  other games copied its super-heavy weapon model.  A standard D&D 1E long
  sword weighs 6 pounds.  It's not practical to use a one-handed weapon heavier
  than about 5 pounds at most, and an actual long sword weighs about 3 pounds
  (which is the 5E value).  For comparison, a modern baseball bat is definitely
  a two-handed weapon, but it weighs only about 2 pounds.

  In the other direction, a long sword weighs 13.0 pounds in Angband and 19.6
  pounds in Ultima VI.  Even those don't touch the absurdity of Robert
  Baratheon's warhammer, which Eddard Stark (not a cripple) can barely even
  lift.

  D&D 1E/2E weapon weights do actually have a justification, to reflect the
  practical headache of actually carrying around a long sword, but games
  typically don't consider that.

* "Long sword" is something of a gaming English term; a better real-world term
  is "arming sword".  A real-world "long sword" corresponds roughly to a type
  of a gaming English "two-handed sword" in older games, though it's becoming
  more common for a game "long sword" to actually require two hands.

* Broad swords actually are from the early modern era, about the mid-1500s at
  the earliest.  They were intended to accompany firearms.

* Real swords are often blunter than people think.  This is actually
  deliberate; late medieval and early modern European long swords were designed
  so that they could be held two-handed with one hand on the blade (this
  technique is called "half-swording"), specifically to change the weapon from
  a slashing one to a thrusting or bashing one -- slashing is virtually useless
  against a well-armored opponent, but thrusting and bashing still remain
  useful.  (Swordmaking in Japan placed an emphasis on sharpness partly because
  good armor was significantly rarer there than in Europe.)

  Yes, you aren't supposed to slash at a heavily-armored opponent.  Aside from
  half-swording, you can also grapple or overbear such an opponent, wield a
  weapon (e.g., a warhammer) effective against good armor, go after the more
  numerous lightly-armored opponents, or aim at the horse the well-armored
  opponent is often riding.

* Those flails your cleric wields are of dubious historical authenticity.
  There is a notable lack of references to them in older literature, and it's
  suspected that the handful of examples in museums are fraudulent.

* Polearms were used by militaries for much longer than people think; the
  United States military did not fully stop using them until around 1900.
  (... No, bayonets do not count as polearms.)

* Crossbows are supposed to be much easier to use than regular bows; that's why
  they had such an impact in real life.  This does happen to some extent in
  later editions of D&D, just not 1E/2E.  For a skilled hero, a bow would be
  better because it has a higher rate of fire; reloading a medieval European
  crossbow takes a long time.  A Chinese repeating crossbow (often written
  "cho-ko-nu" in gaming English) is even easier to use.

* Medieval crossbows or regular bows have serious logistics problems that games
  rarely consider.

  A crossbow takes a long time to reload, but you do need to in a real battle.
  A European crossbowman is typically accompanied by a shieldbearer carrying a
  gigantic shield (a pavis, much larger than a tower shield) that the
  crossbowman can shelter behind to reload.  That's double the number of men
  your army's quartermaster needs to feed, right there.

  A longbowman might achieve a rate of fire of 10 shots per minute -- 2.5x that
  of character with Haste in this game.  The problem is supplying that much
  ammunition.  A longbowman isn't carrying 250 arrows like your characters
  might; it will be more like several dozen, not enough to last more than a few
  minutes.  That longbowman is going to need wagons with ample supplies, and
  even those can be exhausted given that a battle can take hours; commanders
  may be faced with having to send those hard-to-train longbowmen into melee
  combat.  Even paying for that many fletchers to make that many arrows turns
  out to be a significant expense ("Fletcher" is a not uncommon last name for a
  reason) -- also, how are you going to move that many arrows?

  Also, if you read Lord of the Rings, did you notice how Tolkien sedulously
  tracks Legolas's supply of arrows?  It's fairly significant that these games
  track individual arrows at all.

* Assuming that skill is not a problem (not a reasonable assumption for actual
  armies, but fine for a handful of heroes), bows are actually powerful enough
  that they aren't fully superseded by firearms until the appearance of mass-
  produced rifles in the mid-19th century.  On the other hand, bows are not as
  good at punching through plate mail/armor as commonly believed; the reason
  the English won a crushing victory at the Battle of Agincourt (1415) wasn't
  because longbows work like wands of magic missiles.

* Slings are actually much deadlier than people (and D&D rules) generally
  think.  People tend to think of slingshots when slings are mentioned; those
  are genuinely weak.  Slings are extremely difficult to actually aim well,
  though; it's entirely possible to accidentally hurl a sling stone backwards,
  which is unlikely with a bow or gun no matter how much of a new user you are.
  (That means David taking out Goliath is more a matter of superior skill than
  of being a fortunate underdog.)

* It's commonly said that real plate mail isn't nearly as limiting as CRPGs and
  standard fantasy worlds portray them.  That isn't really the case in D&D
  1E/2E, which make a distinction between "plate mail" and "plate armor".
  (Yes, that's weird, but the rules explicitly state it.)  "Plate armor" is
  usually what people mean when they say "plate mail", and it's "plate armor"
  that is easy to move around in, very protective, and supremely expensive.
  "Plate armor" protects the entire body with very few gaps, using interlocking
  overlapping plates to do so, and distributing the weight so it's not as
  encumbering.  It's also, according to the 1E DMG, too technologically
  advanced to exist in a standard D&D game world.  It was invented later
  (about 1420) than gunpowder weaponry, being developed partly to counter it.
  Only in the 17th century, during the Thirty Years' War, did gunpowder weapons
  finally become powerful enough to make plate armor not worthwhile in combat.

  If you want to look up the formal modern academic terms for plate armor,
  start with "white armor" and "Gothic plate armor"; the difference between
  these is more important than knowing the difference between a glaive and a
  glaive-guisarme.

* In modern usage, "mail" is only supposed to describe armor made of linked
  rings.  So "chain mail" is still a valid term, but "plate mail" is not.

* It's doubtful whether "ring mail" and "banded mail" even ever existed at all,
  historically.  Even the D&D 2E PHB reports this, but by then people had
  already been throwing around the 1E terms for years.  Gygax cites a source
  from 1909.  (Reminder: it once was difficult to find up-to-date sources.)

* Leather armor did exist, but it wasn't actually used often, because it
  doesn't work well in practice.  This is partly because cloth/padded armor
  actually works better than most people think.

* Shields really ought to protect you better in combat than they do here.  A 5%
  reduction in hit chance is little compared to how much it actually helped.
  This is less true if you have the more technologically advanced plate armor
  around; once armor that good started appearing, elite fighters relied less
  and less upon shields -- but armor that good isn't supposed to exist in D&D
  1E/2E.

* It's stated in the sourcebooks (e.g., the Wilderness Survival Guide) that
  lower-level lightning spells aren't as deadly as the real thing.  The reverse
  is actually the case, since in real life, a direct lightning bolt strike only
  kills the victim about 10% of the time.  In D&D 1E/2E, a Lightning Bolt that
  does 5d6 damage will outright kill a person with 10 hit points (more than the
  median soldier) more often than that.

* While pin-and-tumbler locks predate the entire medieval era, they were rather
  exotic items until the Industrial Revolution, especially with the invention
  and spread of the mass-produced Yale lock in the mid-19th century.  Their
  presence is sensible here if they're protecting something valuable, but in
  many CRPGs, including this one, they often protect things of little or even
  no value.  In such cases, it may actually make economic sense to steal the
  lock itself.

* Even major cities in the Forgotten Realms have low populations; there are few
  cities with a population of more than 50,000.  The same is true of most other
  D&D settings.  Real life and typical fantasy settings both have their largest
  cities with populations in the hundreds of thousands.

  In 1400, Paris was the largest western European city, with a population of
  about 250,000.  The next largest cities would have all been in what is now
  northern Italy.  This is all despite a severe famine that started in 1315
  (roughly the same time the Little Ice Age began and reduced crop yields), the
  Hundred Years' War which started in 1337, and the Black Death which started
  in 1348.

  I suspect the low populations of the typical D&D setting reflects its more
  direct inheritance from Tolkien compared to most other fantasy fiction.
  Middle-earth in the late Third Age is similarly depopulated, just with
  clearer reasons for it.

* People these days tend to assume the literacy rate was very low before the
  invention of Gutenberg's printing press.  It was still around 15% to 20% in
  Western Europe.

* The level of trade depicted in the Gold Box games is more typical of the
  Renaissance or early modern age than the actual late medieval period.

* Inns were also not significant in the medieval era, because there weren't
  enough travelers to justify very many of them.  Travelers tended to rely upon
  one of two alternatives.  (1) Travelers often just relied upon individual
  hospitality; this is partly why sacred hospitality used to be such a big
  deal.  (2) Many travelers in the medieval era were actually religious
  pilgrims, and often stayed at monasteries.  Gygax was aware of this (the 1E
  MM/DMG random encounter tables have you encounter pilgrims fairly often), but
  most of his imitators are not.

  This is related to the above point, because trade results in more travelers.
  The same also applies to a significant extent to taverns.  Not that inns or
  taverns didn't exist at all -- they're a notable element of the Canterbury
  Tales (1386) -- but they were not common.  (You'll probably realize that this
  statement also depends on exactly when you define the medieval era ending.)

* While you don't see it too much in Pool of Radiance, Forgotten Realms
  political entities like Cormyr or Sembia behave an awful lot like modern-day
  Westphalian nation-states, which shouldn't happen in a pre-modern culture
  without good reason.  (Though that is not necessarily unrealistic -- the
  Roman Empire behaved in many ways like a modern nation-state.  It just isn't
  anything like medieval Europe.)

* Similar to the above, those political entities also tend to have significant
  standing armies -- very much like the Romans did, and very much unlike actual
  European medieval powers; very much like most other standard fantasy nations,
  and very much unlike Westeros.

* If you've read a lot of printed fantasy, you may notice there isn't much
  reference to feudalism in D&D.  This actually accurately reflects the time
  period; western European feudalism started to break down as early as the 12th
  century, and that decline accelerated in the 14th century.  There are
  multiple reasons for this that historians debate furiously, even including
  "feudalism never existed", but probably the most important is the
  centralization of power in kings, which itself happened for all kinds of
  reasons.  The main practical problems with feudalism are the lack of a good
  way to stop two major vassals from fighting each other, and that vassals
  tended to prefer being taxed to the mandatory military service standard for
  feudalism.

  The Black Death in the mid-14th century particularly sped up the decay of
  western European feudalism: many workers died, but capital was preserved;
  thus demand for labor vastly outstripped supply, leading surviving commoners
  to demand, and often actually get, better living conditions.  This in turn
  helped eventually lead to commoners having enough wealth to actually justify
  the numerous inns and taverns found in the standard fantasy setting.

  Feudalism is actually more visible in Tolkien (who kept it muted, because he
  was actually an anarcho-monarchist ... yes, Tolkien actually considered
  himself an anarchist), and in Martin (in Westeros, society typically works on
  an early medieval societal model, despite the latest technology often being
  early modern or even 19th century), than it is in almost all CRPGs.

* Castles stopped being built for military purposes when cannons got good
  enough.  Dragons, earth elementals, and teleportation should also count
  towards this, really.  (A lot of real castles were actually built for
  aesthetic purposes, because "late medieval is awesome!" has been popular for
  a long time -- Neuschwanstein is probably the best example of this.  That's
  the castle the one in Disneyland is based upon.)

* Food supplies are generally not an issue in the standard fantasy world; when
  it does become a problem, it's usually because of a war.  In real life, they
  were a problem even for peacetime affluent societies all the way up to the
  19th century.  There were massive volcanic eruptions in 1783 and 1815, either
  more significant than any since, that caused global cooling significant
  enough to cause crop failures in the following years.  This was one of the
  driving forces behind westward expansion in the United States; farmland in
  marginal areas was abandoned at the time.  (Those forests in New England that
  are now famous for changing colors in the fall?  Those were mostly farmland
  when the United States declared independence.)

  In the real medieval period, you could expect crop failures resulting in
  famine every several years; a single crop failure generally didn't result in
  a severe famine, but two or more in a row was another matter.

* In the Gold Box games, wolves generally have a bad reputation, as they do in
  much of standard fantasy.  They generally have a much better reputation these
  days, with much of that because they are the sigil of the Starks of Westeros.
  This is likely inspired by real-life western Europe having problems with
  wolves terrorizing urban citizens all the way up to about the 18th century.

* Any magical society with a sufficiently advanced level of magic is going to
  use it as we do technology; you will start to get things like crystal ball
  telecommunications networks and social teleportation services.  This DOES
  happen in Eberron and Harry Potter; the Forgotten Realms also have a high
  magic level and should thus behave in many un-medieval ways.  There's a
  reason why Tolkien, Martin, etc. mostly create low-magic worlds; powerful
  magic like continents sinking into the ocean and 700-foot-high 300-mile-long
  enchanted ice walls should be decidedly exceptional, or it will make your
  world behave untraditionally.

  This is also a reason why Greyhawk is typically the standard D&D game
  setting: Dark Sun, Eberron, Planescape, and Ravenloft are all deliberately
  un-medieval in many ways, and Dragonlance has its own idiosyncratic
  mythology.

* A "buccaneer" is supposed to be specific to the Caribbean and its age of
  piracy.  "Pirate" is a better culture- and era-independent term.  The Tampa
  Bay Buccaneers are in the right general area, at least.  The ones in this
  game ... not so much.

* Finally, the very concept of not having anachronisms in fiction is itself a
  modern one.  You won't find much like it in Shakespeare, for instance.  It
  only starts to be significant around the time of the popularity of Ivanhoe,
  published in 1819.  Tolkien didn't care much; his societies actually most
  resemble 6th-century England, so many of the things we take for granted in
  fantasy fiction would fit there about as much as express trains, cruise
  missiles, or armored personnel carriers would in AD&D -- and all three of
  those actually DO exist in Middle-earth, incidentally.  (Tolkien was always
  cheerful about anachronisms.)  And when you get to computer games, you have
  battery-powered brass lanterns in the original Adventure, plastic explosives
  in Zork, space fighter combat in Ultima, blaster guns in Might and Magic,
  elevators in Wizardry, tinker gnomes in Krynn, the church of Gond
  Wonderbringer in the Forbidden Realms ... and even if you insist on
  historical accuracy, which relatively few non-modern games even try to do,
  it's very hard to prevent technology from centuries later getting through
  somewhere.  (For instance, doorknobs were only invented during the
  Industrial Revolution -- but almost the first thing mentioned in The Hobbit
  is the knob on the door to Bag End.)

SECTION 14.4 - Miscellaneous Criticism
--------------------------------------

I'm not going to do a full review here (if I didn't think this game was good,
do you think I'd be writing all this?), but do want to make some remarks that
don't often come up.

* One often overlooked phenomenon in determining why an original piece of media
  is often good compared to its sequels: You have much more time to write the
  first installation than any subsequent one.

  No one truly knows about the first installation in your series until it hits
  the shelves, after all.  Once it is published, now you're under pressure to
  produce a sequel in less time than it took to produce the original.

  To meet that schedule, for a game it's often easy to adapt the same engine.
  This does actually make sequels less work, but any deficiencies in the
  initial engine are magnified, and even without that other problems crop up;
  the writers of the Gold Box games are not quite as literate following Curse
  of the Azure Bonds.

  It's also easy to correct problems in sequels without adequately considering
  what made the original good.  I believe that's a large part of what makes
  Secret of the Silver Blades not nearly as good as any other games in this
  series.

* The Gold Box engine went through numerous refinements, but one thing that
  was never dropped is the 7680 byte script limit.  Even with graphics taking
  twice the space, greatly enlarging that 7680 should not have been much of a
  technical problem once you drop support for any 8-bit platform.  That limit,
  already a problem here, becomes worse in later games.

* Those character portraits ... did you notice they don't even appear for most
  of the game?  They only work if you are on virtual disk 3; the documentation
  actually says this, but it's easy to miss.  And then did you notice they
  don't depict more than one race ... for multiple definitions of the term
  "race"?  It's an obvious thing to drop if your resources are in any way
  limited (SSI did exactly this); this is about the start of the era where the
  number of floppy disks your program fits becomes a serious limit.

* Am I the only one annoyed SSI didn't know how to spell "parley"?  They were
  clearly more literate than that ...

* SSI clearly had well-above-average programmers; look at how Secret of the
  Silver Blades works under the hood.  But they'd probably get torn to shreds
  if you transplant modern practices to 1990.  A lot of what they wrote here
  could easily be shot down either by a technical interviewer or in code
  review.

  Back then, if you were truly the elite of the elite, you often wouldn't write
  a game in a language as high-level as Pascal or C; you'd write in assembly.
  The main reason you would not, portability, was a serious problem circa 1990.

* There were very good reasons to replicate the D&D tabletop game engine.
  People tend to think it's for some combination of familiarity and
  marketability; that explains much of but not all of it.

  It also takes significant resources to develop game mechanics that are
  interesting and well-balanced.

  Wizardry 1/2/3 work in part simply because their authors ruthlessly stole
  from D&D (the entire concept of "originality" was hardly known that long ago,
  anywhere in software; almost everyone stole from everyone else).

  Ultima works because Origin builds worlds, as its ads say.  They certainly
  don't build well-rounded game mechanics.

  Might and Magic works because Jon van Caneghem essentially said "all of this
  is awful" and wrote something that wasn't.

  If you copy D&D's known-to-not-be-awful mechanics, you skip a huge amount of
  work and can put more resources into actually scripting the game.

  My standard example of a contemporary original system which was thought over
  but nonetheless has severe flaws is Dragon Wars.  There, if you invest in the
  wrong skills, you may be screwed and have to start over.  Also, you are
  *more* likely to be killed with higher maximum hit points.

* The Gold Box games have a major advantage over most other contemporary CRPGs:
  it mostly applies the same rules to everyone, whether party or monster.  SSI
  could have made that a major selling point.  "Sick of monsters shooting
  diagonally when you cannot?  Tired of monsters having endless reserves of
  magic?  Fed up with your characters having hundreds of hit points when enemy
  humans have thousands?"

  A lot of that is simply just good programming practice: why write two
  separate code paths for characters and monsters, when you can just write it
  once?


SECTION 15.1 - References
-------------------------

Here are some other sources you can consult about the game.

AD&D Pool of Radiance Clue Book, ISBN not known (I suspect there isn't one), 64
  pp.  This has a complete set of maps, is reasonably comprehensive, and is the
  classic reference for the game.  Physical copies are of some interest to
  collectors.  Despite being published by SSI, this isn't actually all that
  accurate, though it is still far more accurate than the average Prima
  strategy guide.  Its details appear to better reflect the Apple II or
  Commodore 64 versions of the game.

These three books are the core D&D 1E books that have many of the basic rules:
  AD&D 1st Edition Player's Handbook, ISBN 0-935696-01-6. (PHB)
  AD&D 1st Edition Dungeon Master's Guide, ISBN 0-935696-02-4. (DMG)
  AD&D 1st Edition Monster Manual, ISBN 0-935696-00-8. (MM)
Any source that claims these games primarily use BECMI or D&D 2E is wrong.  The
2E rules are relatively similar to 1E rules (they're the pair of editions that
are most closely related), but significant differences still exist.  At the
time of Pool of Radiance's release, OD&D/BECMI/1E were all that existed.  Later
Gold Box games still use mostly D&D 1E rules even though 2E was then the latest
and greatest in the tabletop world.

AD&D 1st Edition Unearthed Arcana, ISBN 088038-084-5. (UA)  These optional
  rules released later in 1st Edition's lifecycle are mostly not used in the
  Gold Box games, though there are a few exceptions, primarily magical items.

AD&D 1st Edition Monster Manual II, ISBN 0-88038-031-4. (MM2) This has
  several relevant monsters not described in the original Monster Manual, and
  also the rules for statistics of 19 and higher.

AD&D 1st Edition Field Folio, ISBN 0-935696-21-0.  (FF)  While all the other
  D&D Gold Box games draw some inspiration from here, and some monsters
  featured in other CRPGs made their debut here, nothing from this book is in
  Pool of Radiance.

AD&D 1st Edition Deities & Demigods, ISBN 0-935696-22-9.  (DD)  This has the
  rules for statistics above 18.  I don't think it has anything else relevant.
  (DD does clearly spell out the magic resistance rules; the DMG also has them,
  but good luck locating them!)

AD&D Forgotten Realms Campaign Set (1st Edition), ISBN 0-88038-472-7.  This has
  the original campaign information for the Forgotten Realms.

AD&D Forgotten Realms Ruins of Adventure Official Game Adventure, ISBN
  0-88038-588-X.  (RoA)  This is the official tabletop game adaptation of the
  computer game.  It follows the same rough overall plot, but there are many
  differences in detail.  It has a reputation for being nowhere near as good as
  the computer game, mostly because it doesn't take advantage of the additional
  interaction a human DM can provide.  It is also generally easier than the
  Gold Box version in principle, perhaps because the computer version has the
  potent magic of "quit and load saved game".

Pool of Radiance, by James M. Ward and Jane Cooper Hong, ISBN 0-88038-735-1,
  316 pp.  This is the official novelization of the computer game.  Like the
  adventure module, its reputation is nowhere near as good as the computer
  game.

Quest for Clues II, ed. Shay Addams, ISBN 0-929373-01-04 (same as for QfC III
  which is odd), 181 pp.  This is the Quest for Clues book with a Pool of
  Radiance walkthrough, on pages 83...93.  As with all Questbusters
  walkthroughs, it isn't particularly detailed.

Computer Gaming World references:
  #49 (Aug 1988) p. 20...21: Sneak preview.
  #54 (Dec 1988) p. 28, 60...62: Two reviews, by Ken St. Andre and Tracie
    Forman Hines; many criticisms, both positive and negative, look strange
    in retrospect.  Scorpia never gave a full-length review, even though she
    played and completed the game.
  #55 (Jan 1989) p. 33: early sales reports.
  #64 (Oct 1989) p. 41: nominee for 1989 RPG of the Year.
  #72 (Jun 1990) p. 18: yes, it really was that slow on an original IBM PC.
  #76 (Nov 1990) p. 70: yes, the AI really was that bad in earlier versions.
  #85 (Aug 1991) p. 51: Scorpia gives a hint about Tyranthraxus.
  #87 (Oct 1991) p. 20: Scorpia gives a brief review in her RPG survey.

  CGW's reader ratings initially were high, though not as high as Magic Candle,
  Ultima V, or Wasteland.  (You should play all of those, too!)

  Minor mentions (including ads):
  #38 (Jul-Aug 1987) p. 42
  #42 (Dec 1987) p. 23
  #44 (Feb 1988) p. 36
  #45 (Mar 1988) p. 17
  #48 (Jun 1988) p. 57
  #49 (Aug 1988) p. 10
  #50 (Sep 1988) p. 22, p. 46
  #52 (Oct 1988) p. 38
  #53 (Nov 1988) p. 50
  #56 (Feb 1989) p. 63
  #60 (Jun 1989) p. 8...9
  #61 (Jul 1989) p. 40...41
  #62 (Aug 1989) p. 8...9
  #66 (Dec 1989) p. 69
  #67 (Jan 1990) p. 86
  #68 (Feb 1990) p. 64
  #77 (Dec 1990) p. 127

QuestBusters references:
  #47 (Vol. V #10, Oct 1988) p. 1, 11...13: review by Shay Addams.  Mentions
    it's combat-heavy and faithful to the tabletop version.  It also says it's
    fast on a Commodore 64.
  #49 (Vol. V #12, Dec 1988) p. 14: user-written hints.  And by user, I mean
    Ken St. Andre, best known for Wasteland.
  #51 (Vol. VI #2, Feb 1989) p. 2: announcement of IBM conversion
  There was never a full-scale walkthrough published in QuestBusters; it only
    appeared in Quest for Clues II.

  Minor mentions (includes user-written hints, normal for QuestBusters):
  #48 (Vol. V #11, Nov 1988) p. 14
  #50 (Vol. VI #1, Jan 1989) p. 13...14
  #51 (Vol. VI #2, Feb 1989) p. 13...14
  #52 (Vol. VI #3, Mar 1989) p. 2
  #53 (Vol. VI #4, Apr 1989) p. 2
  #57 (Vol. VI #8, Aug 1989) p. 2
  #58 (Vol. VI #9, Sep 1989) p. 13
  #61 (Vol. VI #12, Dec 1989), p. 13

http://gbc.zorbus.net/index.html
  Gold Box Companion home page.  Already listed elsewhere, but this page also
  has links to many other Gold Box Web pages worth mentioning.

http://www.gamebanshee.com/poolofradiance/
  Polished and reasonably comprehensive Web-based walkthrough.

http://www.gamefaqs.com/
  nes/587518-advanced-dungeons-and-dragons-pool-of-radiance/faqs/51292
  This is the best walkthrough I know of for the NES version.

https://rpgcodex.net/forums/threads/
  lets-play-pool-of-radiance-with-one-character.129308/
  Null Null's single-character playthrough.  (Yes, this is possible.)

http://crpgaddict.blogspot.com/
  CRPG Addict has extensive coverage of Pool of Radiance (significantly more
  than what he has tagged).

For more technical references, see Hacking Overview.

SECTION 15.2 - FAQ Version History
----------------------------------

This is a changelog.  Any older significant revision should be available via
the Internet Archive.

v2.00 (2026-04-02)
* This latest deep dive fixes a lot of mistakes and adds even more detail.  A
  large majority of such places where I just trusted (1) the documentation; (2)
  the clue book; (3) what the game says; (4) the D&D 1E sourcebooks; or (5) how
  later Gold Box games work, where that information does not reflect what the
  game actually does, should now be fixed.  (If you're wondering, a fair number
  of people do e-mail me to correct mistakes, but most of the time I catch my
  own mistakes.)
* Added huge number of precise technical details, in their own sections.  The
  technical detail is more for myself than anyone else; I don't expect more
  than a handful of people to care about or to be able to fully understand this
  level of detail.
* Now specifically licensed under CC BY-NC 4.0.
* There is some reason to use Tandy graphics and sound, since both EGA and PC
  speaker result in slowdown.
* DOSBox-X is now the preferred emulator for experienced users.
* The configuration file should use DOS/Windows-style line terminators.
* Added DFortae mod mention.  (I'll leave any detailed analysis of it to him.)
* Moved removing copy protection to code hacking; I don't think there'd be many
  people left by now who would need practical help with cracking the game.
* Moved exploit section later on; it was taking too much space up front.
  (Restarting the game was left in place; questions about that are too common.)
* Removed maximum level-up hit point table, because it's too buggy in this game
  to summarize precisely and concisely.
* Sokal Keep: the treasures at locations 15...17 are all once-only.
* Podal Plaza: more detail for the monster tavern free-for-all.
* Podal Plaza: you can't pick the lock to the hidden temple of Ilmater.
* Wealthy Area: crash at (4,15).
* Kobold Caves: corrected penalties.
* Lizardman Keep: corrected penalties.
* Valhingen Graveyard: leaving the graveyard after fighting wights but before
  fighting the spectre at location 22 can cause the latter encounter to fail
  to appear.
* Stojanow Gate: you can't pick the gate lock.
* Valjevo Castle: you can't pick the hedge maze gate locks.
* Valjevo Castle Inner Tower: the endgame graphics differ depending on whether
  you have 1, 2, 3, or 4+ characters in your party.
* Minimum hit point roll for level 1 character rule added.
* Rewrote time discussion, with attention given to the de facto time limit.
* Your characters do get older from means other than Haste after 256 years.
* Experience sharing after battle added.
* Level draining drains the level requiring the most XP, not the most recently
  gained level (the game doesn't remember what the most recent was).
* Detail on duel mechanics added.  Duels are good for low-level elves with
  magic-user levels.
* Removed Bend Bars/Lift Gates from Strength table, as I don't think that ever
  gets used in any Gold Box game; the game engine only supports 2 levels of
  barred door opening difficulty.
* Strength restrictions on maximum level can be circumvented with Strength
  buffs.
* Strength 18 allows a Halfling Fighter to train to level 6.
* Strength 19 does not affect carrying capacity as expected.
* Strength 19...25 unexpected door bashing details added.
* Wisdom does not provide any saving throw bonuses (as the PHB claims).
* Dexterity ranged attack bonuses do not apply to all thrown weapons.
* Dexterity thief skill modifiers are only well behaved from 9...19.
* Dexterity always providing an initiative modifier does not actually adhere to
  D&D 1E rules.
* Constitution is only properly behaved from 4...18.
* Constitution level-up bonus corrected (to what the game incorrectly does).
* Constitution saving throw behavior corrected (to what the game incorrectly
  does).
* Constitution 0 behavior noted: it does not permanently kill the character as
  expected, and grants a larger hit point bonus than Constitution 22.
* Charisma outside 3...25 is not properly handled by the game.
* Dwarves do not get a THAC0 bonus against GOBLIN GUARD (#2), HOBGOBLIN LDR
  (#7), or GRISHNAK (#28).
* Elves (correctly) don't get a to-hit bonus with a Light Crossbow, but they
  also (incorrectly) don't get one with a Fine Composite Long Bow.
* Gnomes do not get a THAC0 bonus against GOBLIN GUARD (#2).
* Fighters may only sweep if they are a PC race.
* Thief abilities are not necessarily immediately recalculated.
* More details on opening locked doors.
* Counting the regular back attack bonuses separately, a backstab is +2 to-hit,
  not +4.
* The to-hit and to-damage bonuses from magical launcher and missiles both
  actually stack.
* Tabletop rules don't describe what a generic magical launcher does, only
  specific ones.  That means that even though Pool of Radiance and Curse of the
  Azure Bonds behave differently from later games, neither can be said to be
  right or wrong.
* No barehanded base damage if attacking a Large creature without a weapon.
* Either party ad hoc combat modifier applies to everyone in the party.
* There is no combat map modifier for defense; that only exists for movement.
* The mechanics for magic resistance are actually implemented, though only
  Tyranthraxus has it.  (I thought it wasn't, because there is no creature
  field for it as in all later Gold Box D&D games.)
* If there is a percent reduction to damage, there is nothing actually assuring
  a minimum of 1 damage.
* While this game does define a roll of 20 as an automatic success for a saving
  throw, that is an optional rule in the tabletop game.
* Added section on the combat arena.
* If trying to flee, line of sight to enemies does not matter if there is any
  enemy at all in line of sight.
* Initiative corrections/additions: (1) higher, not lower, is better; (2)
  surprise inflicts a -6 penalty in the first round; (3) initiative 0 prevents
  action; (4) ties are broken by 1d100 roll; (5) ties after that are always won
  by monsters over characters.
* Spellcasting is allowed in the surprise round.
* Morale checks are based on remaining percent hit points.
* The AI decision to surrender requires minimum Intelligence 6, not 4.
* Notes on how the AI chooses what spell to cast.
* Cure Light Wounds: (1) not significantly more likely to cast depending on
  injuries; (2) notes on how the AI prioritizes targets.
* Hold Person: (1) precise definition of affected creatures added; (2) for
  magic-users, spelled out saving throw penalties.
* Silence causes the AI to never use items.
* Snake Charm: (1) does indeed have no limit whatsoever on area affected; (2)
  does actually scale to caster (current) hit points.  I had this right to
  begin with.
* Spiritual Hammer has a +1 magical bonus, always.
* Animate Dead: (1) can work on "monsters" that are not monstrous humanoids;
  animated creatures (2) are turnable as zombies, regardless of HD; (3) have
  base movement 6; (4) lose all memorized spells; (5) die upon being reduced to
  0 HP; (6) permanently die if level-drained.
* Cause Disease: (1) has a casting time of 100, not 10; (2) lasts for 1d6 * 10
  minutes, not indefinitely (as it is supposed to).
* Dispel Magic: (1) cast by a cleric has a casting time of 4, not 6; (2) does
  not behave as expected against any dispellable effect that does not remember
  its original caster level.
* Prayer only works on allies/enemies within 6 squares of the caster.
* Raise Dead has no chance of failure (the manual is wrong about this).
* Restoration details added.
* Charm Person sets Morale to 100.
* Reduce allows a saving throw vs. spell.  (I'm sure you all care.)
* Shield spell: (1) doesn't work as described in the 1E PHB, it's just AC 3,
  not AC 2 or 3 or 4; (2) does not stop damage from a Wand of Magic Missiles.
* Mirror Image bug detailed mechanism now accounted for.  Also added a simple
  fix proposal.
* Ray of Enfeeblement does not have the additional +2%/level effect.
* Stinking Cloud: (1) the coughing from saving against Stinking Cloud still
  prevents spellcasting; (2) causes the AI to never use items; (3) may work on
  undead in non-IBM versions.
* The Strength spell will not work right on any character having levels in any
  unexpected class (paladin, ranger, monk, or druid).
* Haste and Slow: (1) effects on movement aren't correctly adjusted for when
  viewing a character (the actual movement adjustment works correctly); (2)
  both dispel the other effect *and then* affect number of attacks and
  movement.
* Spell-like magic items added to spell summary.
* Starting gold calculation added.
* Gold value integer overflow bug now mentioned.
* NPC treasure share details corrected (this doesn't work how the game claims).
* Dart range rounding artifact now accounted for.  If you're wondering why the
  "1/2/5" range looks odd ... well, it does, but it's what actually happens.
* Padded armor allows base movement 12, not 9.
* There isn't any functional difference between the different kinds of
  mirrors.
* Holy water does 1d6 damage to vulnerable targets, not 2d4.
* Item entries for Boulder and Large Boulder added.
* Corrected dice for Necklace of Missiles; it doesn't have a flat 6 dice,
  it's 1d3 * 2 + 1 dice.
* More details on selling items (rounding down happens).
* More details on magical treasure XP.
* Complete rewrite of random item generation section, with precise details.
* A random Fine Composite Long Bow is not possible.
* You can in fact get actual Bracers AC 2, but only as a very rare random item.
* You can't get Restoration on a randomly generated clerical scroll.
* A random Cloak of Displacement does actually grant the correct +2 saving
  throw bonus.
* The Cloak of Elvenkind operates anywhere, not just outside.
* Dust of Disappearance targeting and duration depends on whether it is used in
  or out of combat.
* Potion of Giant Strength: (1) does not check the class of its drinker; (2)
  confers the ability to throw boulders.
* The Ring of Invisibility grants invisibility for 1 minute which is renewed
  at the end of every round.
* Wand of Fireball and Wand of Lightning Bolt incorrectly permit a save vs.
  spell (rod/staff/wand is correct).
* Wand of Magic Missiles details and bug added.
* Bestiary entries now include type and effect IDs.
* Monster secondary attacks come before primary attacks.
* VAMPIRE (#23/#105): can be protected against with an equipped mirror or
  Wooden Holy Symbol of Tyr, which prevents the charming gaze.
* TROLL (#31): (1) only begins to regenerate 3 minutes after taking damage; (2)
  can actually be stopped from rising from the dead with fire/acid damage, but
  all damage must be fire/acid.
* STIRGE (#61): immobilizes the victim with its blood draining attack
* AHNKHEG (#65): acid squirt details added.
* TYRANITHRAXUS (#66): (1) dragon fear aura detailed description added; (2)
  actually only has 85% magic resistance (still >100% against a level 6 magical
  attack); (3) has a maximum of 3 breath attacks.
* DRIDER (#69): saving throw is unmodified (incorrectly; the saving throw
  penalty code is partly present).
* GHOUL (#72): paralyzes for 63 rounds.
* GIANT MANTIS (#74): immobilizes only until a 3d4 attack the next round, and
  this only works if the victim has less than Strength 19.
* MUMMY (#114): (1) fear aura allows a +1 saving throw bonus with a party size
  of at least 6; (2) mummy rot detailed description added; (3) vulnerability to
  fire details corrected (including bug).
* Completely reorganized technical data.
* The parser for decompressing DAX files cannot handle run length 127...128.
* Effect 30 isn't nauseated (which suggests helplessness), it's coughing from
  Stinking Cloud.
* Effect 31 is a subset of helpless (there are four effects that are); it
  includes anything not from effects 51...53, with nauseated from Stinking
  Cloud the most common.
* Effect 40 isn't in a Stinking Cloud, it's cast a Stinking Cloud (used to
  track expiration of battlefield clouds).
* Effect 50 is specifically mummy rot heal blocking.
* Effect 57 is mummy rot degeneration.
* Effect 58 is immobile.
* Effect 59 is the troll add regeneration timer.
* Effect 69 does not actually cause a saving throw penalty.
* Effect 74 is currently biting and holding.
* Effect 75 is being blood drained.
* Effect 78 is being healed to positive hit points while unconscious.
* Effect 81 (dragon fear/curse) and 82 (mummy fear) details added.
* Effect 87 is the melee mummy rot attack.
* Effect 90 is the dwarf/halfling Constitution poison saving throw bonus
* Effect 101 is troll adding regeneration timer.
* Effect 102 is troll returning from going down timer.
* Effect 103 is the vampire's assume gaseous form ability.
* Effect 105 is 50% magic resistance.  (Not ever used.)
* Effect 106 is 85% magic resistance.  (Not 100%.)
* Effect 126 isn't immunity to gaze attacks, it's gaze attack susceptibility to
  being prevented.
* The remaining three unknown effects (60, 63, 92) will likely remain unknown,
  unless we ever get Pool of Radiance design documents or source code.
* Added file manifest.
* Overview of Gold Box Virtual Machine mechanics added.
* ECL variable type 3 (pointer to uint16) does appear in this game.
* ECL opcode 1E CHECKPARTY description expanded and corrected.
* ECL opcode 21 LOAD FILES description added.
* ECL opcodes 22 PARTY SURPRISE and 23 SURPRISE set and apply the wrong
  modifiers for surprise.
* ECL opcode 28 ROB has issues.  Added hints for dealing with in gameplay.
* ECL opcode 29 ENCOUNTER MENU also allows the party to catch fleeing monsters.
* ECL opcode 2D CALL now has a complete list of recognized operands.
* ECL opcode 2E DAMAGE corrected.
* ECL opcode 30 OR also performs a comparison.
* ECL opcode 34 ECL CLOCK is coded incorrectly (though it turns out not to
  matter because it's never used).
* ECL opcode 36 ADD NPC makes the added NPC friendly, except for LEVEL 6 MU
  (#24).
* ECL opcode 37 LOAD PIECES description added.
* ECL opcode 3B SPELL is coded and called, but incorrectly and is a no-op.
* Removed GBVM addresses that the game never uses or recognizes.  (I'd included
  several that only other Gold Box games use.)
* GBVM $49E5 is the elusive anti-magic flag.
* GBVM $6DC7 is set to 128 for a total party kill.  (It's implemented but not
  ever actually used here; it does actually get used in the sequel.)
* GBVM $6E71 only modifies THAC0.
* STING cheat now fully detailed.
* Overview of save file format added.
* Greatly expanded code overview section.  (The majority of additions in this
  revision are here.)
* Expanded code hacking section.
* Added references to Deities & Demigods.
* Added QuestBusters references.

v1.50 (2021-11-07)
* Changed quotes to be more like how the game works (single for in-game
  quotations, double for game descriptive text).
* Changed location numbering to more closely match both the game's internal
  numbering and Gold Box Companion.
* Added more game text.
* Added more notes on the game not properly registering fleeing.
* The game's Constitution hit point table actually does not go above 20.  (All
  subsequent games have the table go up to 25.)  Anything above that causes
  array-out-of-bounds shenanigans.
* Slow does not either stack cumulatively with itself, or affect allies, unlike
  the tabletop version.
* A Wand of Paralyzation actually requires a save vs. paralyzation, not the
  correct rod/staff/wand.
* Added link to Null Null's single-character Let's Play.
* Added link to CRPG Addict.
* Added list of ECL scripts and maps.
* Moved spell table format to data structure section.
* Executable structure format rearranged.
* The Acolyte NPC can be modified with strange results.
* Some script flag additions and corrections.
* Sokal Keep: the three words on the parchment do have real-life meanings.
* Kuto's Well: random monsters only sometimes attack with high morale.
* Kuto's Well Catacombs: Norris the Gray's treasure may disappear if you fail
  to claim it promptly.
* Mendor's Library: the maximum number of green slime encounters is 7, not 8.
* Cadorna Textiile House: there are different destinations if you flee from
  hobgoblins.
* Wilderness: consoliated advice on the most dangerous monsters.
* Yarash's Pyramid Level 1: a couple of the maze random encounters have
  surprise roll bonuses.
* Yarash's Pyramid Level 2 and 3: corrected teleporter details.
* Yarash's Pyramid Level 3: added mechanics for destroying the machinery.
* Valjevo Castle Inner Tower: noted scripting bug that never fully marks
  Tyranthraxus as defeated.

v1.40 (2020-11-22)
* Overhauled location numbers to mostly match those actually used by the game,
  and by Gold Box Companion and Gold Box Explorer.  (I hadn't known about any
  of these before I wrote the original version.)  There are still places where
  I don't use the internal numbering, to keep things simpler.  This all makes
  this version incompatible with all previous versions, if going into that
  level of detail.
* Split each map section into an overview section and a details section.
* Added more game text.
* Added coordinates to map annotations, if not ambiguous.
* Added full section on Wilderness Lairs.
* Added formalized list of bugs.  (This is not comprehensive by any means.)
* Added detail on how to successfully backstab.
* Added yet another reason not to use NPCs: they make random combats larger.
* Added strategy for using Animate Dead.
* You can in fact fight Ogre Leaders, in the Wealthy Area or Temple of Bane.
  It requires a high Party Strength to have any chance of happening (at least
  66) and is unlikely even then.
* Snake Charm and Animate Dead scale to caster level, not caster hit points.
* Dust of Disappearance will work even against enemies that see invisible, and
  is supposed to.
* Magical armor never actually provides a saving throw bonus.
* Rings of Protection rarely actually provide a saving throw bonus.  The only
  one I know of where that actually works is the one carried by the THEURGIST
  (#110).  (Another case where I was led astray by that working more reliably
  in the sequels.)
* Added more executable offsets: classes allowed by race, statistics by class.
* Civilized Area: more detail on available NPCs.
* Civilized Area: clarified that you must explicitly receive the commission for
  Podal Plaza to both perform and be rewarded for it.
* Slums: the script doesn't check if you ran away before crediting you with
  victory against a set combat.
* Slums: add description of bug that allows you to clear the area without
  fighting any set combats.
* Sokal Keep: searching for the diary only works reliably if you were told
  about it by the spectral defenders.
* Mendor's Library: more detail, including mechanics for green slime in the
  garden.
* Podal Plaza: parley mechanics expanded and corrected.
* Cadorna Textile House: you can't ever get all the random encounters without
  defeating the ogre.
* Cadorna Textile House: added exploit which allows you to open the Cadorna
  family treasure repeatedly.
* Wealthy Area: random encounter probability corrected.
* Wealthy Area: added detail on how random encounters are constructed and
  resolved.
* Wealthy Area: the four-orc patrol counts as encountered as long as you do
  anything other than fight them.
* Nomad Camp: the Shaman's Bracers AC 2 is actually AC 4.
* Yarash's Pyramid: now split into two separate sections, both for clarity and
  because that's how the game handles it internally.
* Buccaneer Base: resting is disturbed by the next random encounter, if active.
* Valhingen Graveyard: the two-handed sword vs. undead isn't actually a good
  choice here.
* Stojanow Gate: more detail and accuracy.

v1.32 (2020-06-07)
* Added effect of transfer to Hillsfar.

v1.31 (2020-05-19)
* Added this version history (retroactive to all previous versions).
* Moved references/acknowledgments to the end; it was taking up too much space
  at the beginning.
* Added note that the best way to reach me is by e-mail.  (I belatedly realized
  that there were lots of comments in places I wasn't checking regularly.)
* Charm Person works on the magic-user in Valhingen Graveyard to convert him to
  a fully friendly NPC.

v1.30 (2020-05-10)
* I overhauled the script that generates monster statistics.  There is more
  information, and most of the mistakes from the days when I added statistics
  by hand should be gone.  (The AI I wrote was a little bit too intelligent --
  the real Pool of Radiance AI favors studded leather armor over Bracers AC 6
  for ... reasons.)
* There is more accurate information on how much XP money and items give.
  That's also now part of the monster statistic generator script.
* All placed magically charged treasure now mentions how many charges it starts
  with.
* The spellcasting delay adjustment is actually division by 3, not 2.  That
  makes spellcasting significantly more powerful than it is in the tabletop
  game.  (So even though Stinking Cloud has a tabletop game delay of 2 ... that
  gets divided by 3, then rounded down to 0, so it actually has no delay in the
  Gold Box games.)
* There are now instructions on how to modify spellcasting delay, in case you
  want something closer to the actual tabletop rules.  (It'll significantly
  alter game balance, of course.)
* Added how AI spellcasting priority works.
* With both spellcasting delay and AI priority not obvious and not in the
  manual, added a table.
* Clarification of area of effect spells: it wasn't clear before what "diameter
  3/5/7" meant.
* You can raise the dead by casting a targeted spell like Cause Light Wounds or
  Burning Hands in combat. (This bug is gone starting in Secret of the Silver
  Blades.)
* More detail on how Animate Dead works.
* Correction for the Sleep spell.  (Yet again.  I think I really do have it
  right this time.)
* The Stinking Cloud AC penalty is larger than I thought.
* Mirror Image is not as effective as it should be, or as in later games. (Also
  fixed in Secret of the Silver Blades.)
* Haste and Slow do not actually affect initiative.
* Strength: for Open Doors, easy vs. hard is in fact implemented, so I put that
  in the table.
* Dexterity: actual adjustments to thief skills.  There are a couple wrong
  numbers in the game's table.
* For avoiding attacks, being third-from-the-bottom is better than being #5 in
  the order.
* A "small/medium" target for a weapon is only so if it BOTH has that size in
  the game files AND has a 1-tile icon.
* For some reason, I thought you couldn't backstab Large opponents in the 1st
  Edition tabletop game.  There's no such rule.  (There *is* a rule much like
  that in 2nd Edition.)
* Added the actual THAC0 table used by the game.  It's a hybrid of 1st/2nd
  edition rules (as you might expect), and it also changes by specific Gold Box
  game.
* More information on binary format.
* Added Computer Gaming World references.
* Added Acknowledgments.

v1.22 (2019-07-11)
* Fixed up a lot of technical details I had added.

v1.21 (2019-07-10)
* "Porphyrys Cadorna" actually had a "y" in it I missed.
* Mention of the not-implemented tabletop rule about firing missiles into a
  melee.

v1.20 (2019-07-07)
* THAC0 in the bestiary corrected for how the game actually calculates it.
* Added Morale mechanic section, and specific monster morale in most cases.
* Added Party Strength calculation.
* Added distance that monsters start at, and what Distance 1 and 2 mean.
* Added more detail on how random encounters are generated and resolved.
* Added more detail everywhere on how safe resting is.
* Added detail on where "F"leeing will move the party.
* Added detail on damage the party can take outside of combat.
* Added temple spell casting section.
* Added surprise rules (which only Pool of Radiance fully supports).
* Added detail on how the game handles time.
* Added range for throwable melee weapons.
* Added many more technical notes.
* Correction for the Sleep spell.  (Again.)
* Thrown weapons do not get a Strength bonus.  (That's a 2nd Edition rule.)
* Valhingen Graveyard commission moved to its own subsection, because the game
  special-cases it in so many ways, and added a lot more detail on it.
* Warning about items randomly disappearing -- it's not actually a bug as
  people sometimes think.  You probably got pickpocketed in Phlan's taverns.
* It does not generally actually help to lower statistics for the sake of
  gaming Party Strength.
* Added note that the game doesn't bother to implement the proper rules about
  recovering from being knocked unconscious.
* Civilized Area: much more information about how visiting a tavern works.
  (That was way back when I was first starting to write this ...)
* Civilized Area: more information about hirable NPCs.
* Civilized Area: added triggers for the proclamations changing.
* Slums: you must deal with Ohlo one way or the other to clear the block.
* Podal Plaza: in version 1.3, if you do not screw up the mission, the block
  should always be clearable.
* Kovel Mansion: even more precision on how number of thief kills works.
* Kobold Caves: more details on traps.
* Lizardman Keep: more precision on how number of lizard man kills works.
* Valhingen Graveyard: more detail on how monsters can regenerate.
* Valhingen Graveyard: discovered conditions under which sanctification works.
* Stojanow Gate: added how the roll for bluffing the bugbears works.
* Valjevo Castle: more detail on how talking with the washerwomen works.
* Extended warning about hit point overflow if you are hacking.
* Monsters #9 and #82 are thought not to actually appear anywhere.

v1.10 (2019-04-07)
* Added advice for starting stats rolled normally.
* Added section on restarting the game.  (It gets asked fairly often.)
* Added section on transferring characters to Curse.  (Asked even more often.)
* Added experience value table for gold/platinum/gems/jewelry.
* Added first version of the Flag List.
* Correction for the Sleep spell.
* Civilized Area: two ways to learn that Porphyrys Cadorna is a traitor.
* Kovel Mansion: more precision on how number of thief kills works.
* Valhingen Graveyard: Skeleton/Zombie/Wight zones now marked (because that
  last one is dangerous).
* Moved my primary e-mail address after decades.
* Gold Box Companion moved to a new Web page.

v1.02 (2016-10-05)
* Corrected error on statistics transferring to Curse of the Azure Bonds.
* Added how to crack version 1.3.
* Added link to FRUA fan remake.

v1.01 (2016-10-04)
* More notes on the Necklace of Missiles.

v1.00 (2016-10-03)
* Original release.

Known unfixed/untested issues:
* Fix multidimensional array descriptions so they are consistently row-major;
  my writing "X*Y" does not reliably reflect which dimension actually comes
  first.
* GRISHNAK (#28) or MACE (#33) AI suspected to attempt to cast Cure Light
  Wounds on unconscious characters; this is expected to be rare.
* Effect 47, already buggy, is suspected to not work at all.

No plans to fix:
* Scripted quotes are not replicated precisely.  This is mostly becuase I THINK
  READING TEXT LIKE THIS IS VERY ANNOYING.  The same goes for any non-diegetic
  misspelling (which I tend to correct).
* I'm not going to change my writing style, which may raise red flags as
  LLM-generated (e.g., I use em dashes far more often than most actual people).
  I don't plan to ever use an LLM to write this.  LLM-generated writing tends
  to use better writing as their sampling source, and it takes extra effort to
  avoid red flags by deliberately playing dumb.

SECTION 15.3 - Acknowledgments
------------------------------

Acknowledgments (not comprehensive):
  * Joonas Hirvonen (author of Gold Box Companion)
  * Simeon Pilgrim (author of the modernized Curse of the Azure Bonds)
  * CondorMan (discoverer of many bugs only present in earlier games)
  * Alpha3KV (for information on transferring characters)

SECTION 15.4 - Things I Want
----------------------------

Things I'd like (please e-mail me if you have any of the below):

(1) a complete, original physical copy of the IBM version 1.0 or 1.1
(2) what does "ECL" stand for?  (Nope, no idea!)

SECTION 15.5 - Legal Notice
---------------------------

This document is licensed under CC BY-NC 4.0.  To view a copy of this license,
visit:
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/

One-sentence summary: You may redistribute or adapt all you want, but you must
credit me, and it must not be primarily/specifically for commercial gain
(exception to the last part: GameFAQs itself).
View in: Text Mode

GameFAQsfacebook.com/GFAQstwitter.com/GameFAQsHelp / Contact UsChange Colors 
gamespot.commetacritic.comfandom.comfanatical.com

SitemapPartnershipsCareersTerms of UseDigital Services Act

Privacy PolicyDo Not Sell My Personal InformationReport Ad

© 2026 FANDOM, INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

This website uses cookies to enhance user experience and to analyze performance and traffic on our website. We also share information about your use of our site with our social media, advertising and analytics partners.Privacy Policy
Do Not Sell My Personal Information Accept Cookies

